=== PAGE 17 ===
B
CHAPTER ONE
Giving From the Heart
The Heart of Nonviolent Communication
What I want in my life is compassion,
a flow between myself and others based
on a mutual giving from the heart.
—Marshall B. Rosenberg, Ph.D.
Introduction
elieving that it is our nature to enjoy giving and receiving in a
compassionate manner, I have been preoccupied most of my life with
two questions: What happens to disconnect us from our compassionate
nature, leading us to behave violently and exploitatively? And
conversely, what allows some people to stay connected to their
compassionate nature under even the most trying circumstances?
My preoccupation with these questions began in childhood, around
the summer of 1943, when our family moved to Detroit, Michigan. The
second week after we arrived, a race war erupted over an incident at a
public park. More than forty people were killed in the next few days.
Our neighborhood was situated in the center of the violence, and we
spent three days locked in the house.
When the race riot ended and school began, I discovered that a name
could be as dangerous as any skin color. When the teacher called my
name during attendance, two boys glared at me and hissed, “Are you a
kike?” I had never heard the word before and didn’t know some people
used it in a derogatory way to refer to Jews. After school, the same two
boys were waiting for me: they threw me to the ground and kicked and
beat me.
Since that summer in 1943, I have been examining the two questions I
mentioned. What empowers us, for example, to stay connected to our
compassionate nature even under the worst circumstances? I am

=== PAGE 18 ===
I
thinking of people like Etty Hillesum, who remained compassionate even
while subjected to the grotesque conditions of a German concentration
camp. As she wrote in her journal at the time,
am not easily frightened. Not because I am brave but because I know that I am
dealing with human beings, and that I must try as hard as I can to understand
everything that anyone ever does. And that was the real import of this morning: not
that a disgruntled young Gestapo officer yelled at me, but that I felt no indignation,
rather a real compassion, and would have liked to ask, ‘Did you have a very
unhappy childhood, has your girlfriend let you down?’ Yes, he looked harassed and
driven, sullen and weak. I should have liked to start treating him there and then,
for I know that pitiful young men like that are dangerous as soon as they are let
loose on mankind.
—Etty Hillesum in Etty: A Diary 1941–1943
While studying the factors that affect our ability to stay compassionate, I
was struck by the crucial role of language and our use of words. I have
since identified a specific approach to communicating—both speaking
and listening—that leads us to give from the heart, connecting us with
ourselves and with each other in a way that allows our natural
compassion to flourish. I call this approach Nonviolent Communication,
using the term nonviolence as Gandhi used it—to refer to our natural
state of compassion when violence has subsided from the heart. While
we may not consider the
NVC: a way of communicating that leads us to give from the heart.
way we talk to be “violent,” words often lead to hurt and pain,
whether for others or ourselves. In some communities, the process I
am describing is known as Compassionate Communication; the
abbreviation NVC is used throughout this book to refer to Nonviolent
or Compassionate Communication.
A Way to Focus Attention
NVC is founded on language and communication skills that strengthen
our ability to remain human, even under trying conditions. It contains

=== PAGE 19 ===
nothing new; all that has been integrated into NVC has been known for
centuries. The intent is to remind us about what we already know—
about how we humans were meant to relate to one another—and to
assist us in living in a way that concretely manifests this knowledge.
NVC guides us in reframing how we express ourselves and hear others.
Instead of habitual, automatic reactions, our words become conscious
responses based firmly on awareness of what we are perceiving, feeling,
and wanting. We are led to express ourselves with honesty and clarity,
while simultaneously paying others a respectful and empathic attention.
In any exchange, we come to hear our own deeper needs and those of
others. NVC trains us to observe carefully, and to be able to specify
behaviors and conditions that are affecting us. We learn to identify and
clearly articulate what we are concretely wanting in any given situation.
The form is simple, yet powerfully transformative.
We perceive relationships in a new light when we use NVC to hear
our own deeper needs and those of others.
As NVC replaces our old patterns of defending, withdrawing, or
attacking in the face of judgment and criticism, we come to perceive
ourselves and others, as well as our intentions and relationships, in a
new light. Resistance, defensiveness, and violent reactions are
minimized. When we focus on clarifying what is being observed, felt,
and needed rather than on diagnosing and judging, we discover the
depth of our own compassion. Through its emphasis on deep listening—
to ourselves as well as to others—NVC fosters respect, attentiveness, and
empathy and engenders a mutual desire to give from the heart.
Although I refer to it as “a process of communication” or “a language
of compassion,” NVC is more than a process or a language. On a deeper
level, it is an ongoing reminder to keep our attention focused on a place
where we are more likely to get what we are seeking.
There is a story of a man on all fours under a street lamp, searching
for something. A policeman passing by asked what he was doing.
“Looking for my car keys,” replied the man, who appeared slightly
drunk. “Did you drop them here?” inquired the officer. “No,” answered
the man, “I dropped them in the alley.” Seeing the policeman’s baffled

=== PAGE 20 ===
expression, the man hastened to explain, “But the light is much better
here.”
I find that my cultural conditioning leads me to focus attention on
places where I am unlikely to get what I want. I developed
NVC as a way to train my attention—
Let’s shine the light of consciousness on places where we can hope to
find what we are seeking. to shine the light of consciousness— on
places that have the potential to yield what I am seeking. What I want
in my life is compassion, a flow between myself and others based on a
mutual giving from the heart.
This quality of compassion, which I refer to as “giving from the heart,”
is expressed in the following lyrics by my friend Ruth
Bebermeyer:
I never feel more given to
than when you take from me—
when you understand the joy I feel
giving to you.
And you know my giving isn’t done
to put you in my debt,
but because I want to live the love
I feel for you.
To receive with grace
may be the greatest giving.
There’s no way I can separate
the two.
When you give to me,
I give you my receiving.
When you take from me, I feel so
given to.
—”Given To” (1978) by Ruth Bebermeyer from the album Given To.

=== PAGE 21 ===
When we give from the heart, we do so out of the joy that springs forth
whenever we willingly enrich another person’s life. This kind of giving
benefits both the giver and the receiver. The receiver enjoys the gift
without worrying about the consequences that accompany gifts given
out of fear, guilt, shame, or desire for gain. The giver benefits from the
enhanced self-esteem that results when we see our efforts contributing to
someone’s well-being.
The use of NVC does not require that the persons with whom we are
communicating be literate in NVC or even motivated to relate to us
compassionately. If we stay with the principles of NVC, stay motivated
solely to give and receive compassionately, and do everything we can to
let others know this is our only motive, they will join us in the process,
and eventually we will be able to respond compassionately to one
another. I’m not saying that this always happens quickly. I do maintain,
however, that compassion inevitably blossoms when we stay true to the
principles and process of NVC.
The NVC Process
To arrive at a mutual desire to give from the heart, we focus the light of
consciousness on four areas—referred to as the four components of the
NVC model.
First, we observe what is actually happening in a situation: what are
we observing others saying or doing that is either enriching or not
enriching our life? The trick is to be able to articulate this observation
without introducing any judgment or evaluation—to simply say what
people are doing that we either like or don’t like. Next, we state how we
feel when we observe this action: are we hurt, scared, joyful, amused,
irritated? And thirdly, we say what needs of ours are connected to the
feelings we have identified. An awareness of these three components is
present when we use NVC to clearly and honestly express how we are.
Four components of NVC:
1.observations
2.feelings

=== PAGE 22 ===
3.needs
4.requests
For example, a mother might express these three pieces to her teenage
son by saying, “Felix, when I see two balls of soiled socks under the
coffee table and another three next to the TV, I feel irritated because I
am needing more order in the rooms that we share in common.”
She would follow immediately with the fourth component—a very
specific request: “Would you be willing to put your socks in your room
or in the washing machine?” This fourth component addresses what we
are wanting from the other person that would enrich our lives or make
life more wonderful for us.
Thus, part of NVC is to express these four pieces of information very
clearly, whether verbally or by other means. The other part of this
communication consists of receiving the same four pieces of information
from others. We connect with them by first sensing what they are
observing, feeling, and needing; then we discover what would enrich
their lives by receiving the fourth piece—their request.
As we keep our attention focused on the areas mentioned, and help
others do likewise, we establish a flow of communication, back and
forth, until compassion manifests naturally: what I am observing,
feeling, and needing; what I am requesting to enrich my life; what you
are observing, feeling, and needing; what you are requesting to enrich
your life …
NVC Process
The concrete actions we 
observe that affect our well-being
How we feel in relation
to what we observe
The needs, values, desires, etc. 
that create our feelings

=== PAGE 23 ===
The concrete actions we request
in order to enrich our lives
When we use this process, we may begin either by expressing ourselves
or by empathically receiving these four pieces of information from
others. Although we will learn to listen for and verbally express each of
these components in Chapters 3–6, it is important to keep in mind that
NVC is not a set formula, but something that adapts to various situations
as well as personal and cultural styles. While I conveniently refer to NVC
as a
“process” or “language,” it is possible to experience all four pieces of
the process without uttering a single word.
Two parts of NVC:
1. expressing honestly through the four component
2. receiving empathically through the four components
The essence of NVC is in our consciousness of the four components,
not in the actual words that are exchanged.
Applying NVC in Our Lives and World
When we use NVC in our interactions—with ourselves, with another
person, or in a group—we become grounded in our natural state of
compassion. It is therefore an approach that can be effectively applied at
all levels of communication and in diverse situations:
intimate relationships
families
schools
organizations and institutions
therapy and counseling relationships
diplomatic and business negotiations
disputes and conflicts of any nature

=== PAGE 24 ===
W
I
Some people use NVC to create greater depth and caring in their
intimate relationships:
hen I learned how I can receive (hear), as well as give (express), through
using NVC, I went beyond feeling attacked and ‘doormattish’ to really
listening to words and extracting their underlying feelings. I discovered a very
hurting man to whom I had been married for twenty-eight years. He had asked me
for a divorce the weekend before the [NVC] workshop. To make a long story short,
we are here today—together, and I appreciate the contribution [NVC has] made to
our happy ending…. I learned to listen for feelings, to express my needs, to accept
answers that I didn’t always want to hear. He is not here to make me happy, nor am
I here to create happiness for him. We have both learned to grow, to accept, and to
love, so that we can each be fulfilled.
—a workshop participant in San Diego, California
Others use it to build more effective relationships at work:
have been using NVC in my special education classroom for about one year. It
can work even with children who have language delays, learning difficulties, and
behavior problems. One student in our classroom spits, swears, screams, and stabs
other students with pencils when they get near his desk. I cue him with, ‘Please say
that another way. Use your giraffe talk.’ [Giraffe puppets are used in some
workshops as a teaching aid to demonstrate NVC.] He immediately stands up
straight, looks at the person toward whom his anger is directed, and says calmly,
‘Would you please move away from my desk? I feel angry when you stand so close
to me.’ The other students might respond with something like, ‘Sorry! I forgot it
bothers you.’
I began to think about my frustration with this child and to try to discover what I
needed from him (besides harmony and order). I realized how much time I had put
into lesson planning and how my needs for creativity and contribution were being
short-circuited in order to manage behavior. Also, I felt I was not meeting the
educational needs of the other students. When he was acting out in class, I began to
say, ‘I need you to share my attention.’ It might take a hundred cues a day, but he
got the message and would usually get involved in the lesson.
—a teacher in Chicago, Illinois
A doctor writes:

=== PAGE 25 ===
I use NVC more and more in my medical practice. Some patients ask me whether I
am a psychologist, saying that usually their doctors are not interested in the way
they live their lives or deal with their diseases. NVC helps me understand what
patients’ needs are and what they need to hear at a given moment. I find this
particularly helpful in relating to patients with hemophilia and AIDS because there
is so much anger and pain that the patient/health care–provider relationship is
often seriously impaired. Recently a woman with AIDS, whom I have been treating
for the past five years, told me that what has helped her the most have been my
attempts to find ways for her to enjoy her daily life. My use of NVC helps me a lot
in this respect. Often in the past, when I knew that a patient had a fatal disease, I
myself would get caught in the prognosis, and it was hard for me to sincerely
encourage them to live their lives. With NVC, I have developed a new
consciousness as well as a new language. I am amazed to see how much it fits in
with my medical practice. I feel more energy and joy in my work as I become
increasingly engaged in the dance of NVC.
—a physician in Paris, France
Still others use this process in the political arena. A French cabinet
member visiting her sister remarked how differently the sister and her
husband were communicating and responding to each other. Encouraged
by their descriptions of NVC, she mentioned that she was scheduled the
following week to negotiate some sensitive issues between France and
Algeria regarding adoption procedures. Though time was limited, we
dispatched a French-speaking trainer to Paris to work with the cabinet
minister. The minister later attributed much of the success of her
negotiations in Algeria to her newly acquired communication
techniques.
In Jerusalem, during a workshop attended by Israelis of varying
political persuasions, participants used NVC to express themselves
regarding the highly contested issue of the West Bank. Many of the
Israeli settlers who have established themselves on the West Bank
believe that they are fulfilling a religious mandate by doing so, and they
are locked in conflict not only with Palestinians but also with other
Israelis who recognize the Palestinian hope for national sovereignty in
the region. During a session, one of my trainers and I modeled empathic
hearing through NVC and then invited participants to take turns role-
playing each other’s position. After twenty minutes, a settler announced

=== PAGE 26 ===
that she would be willing to consider relinquishing her land claims and
moving out of the West Bank into internationally recognized Israeli
territory if her political opponents could listen to her in the way she had
just been listened to.
Worldwide, NVC now serves as a valuable resource for communities
facing violent conflicts and severe ethnic, religious, or political tensions.
The spread of NVC training and its use in mediation by people in conflict
in Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, and
elsewhere have been a source of particular gratification for me. My
associates and I were once in Belgrade for three highly charged days
training citizens working for peace. When we first arrived, expressions of
despair were visibly etched on the trainees’ faces, for their country was
then enmeshed in a brutal war in Bosnia and Croatia. As the training
progressed, we heard the ring of laughter in their voices as they shared
their profound gratitude and joy for having found the empowerment
they were seeking. Over the next two weeks, during trainings in Croatia,
Israel, and Palestine, we again saw desperate citizens in war-torn
countries regaining their spirits and confidence from the NVC training
they received.
I feel blessed to be able to travel throughout the world teaching
people a process of communication that gives them power and joy. Now,
with this book, I am pleased and excited to be able to share the richness
of Nonviolent Communication with you.
Summary
NVC helps us connect with each other and ourselves in a way that allows
our natural compassion to flourish. It guides us to reframe the way we
express ourselves and listen to others by focusing our consciousness on
four areas: what we are observing, feeling, and needing, and what we
are requesting to enrich our lives. NVC fosters deep listening, respect,
and empathy and engenders a mutual desire to give from the heart.
Some people use NVC to respond compassionately to themselves, some
to create greater depth in their personal relationships, and still others to
build effective relationships at work or in the political arena. Worldwide,
NVC is used to mediate disputes and conflicts at all levels.

=== PAGE 27 ===
NVC in Action
Interspersed throughout the book are dialogues entitled NVC in Action.
These dialogues intend to impart the flavor of an actual exchange in which
a speaker is applying the principles of Nonviolent Communication.
However, NVC is not simply a language or a set of techniques for using
words; the consciousness and intent that it embraces may be expressed
through silence, a quality of presence, as well as through facial expressions
and body language. The NVC in Action dialogues you will be reading are
necessarily distilled and abridged versions of real-life exchanges, where
moments of silent empathy, stories, humor, gestures, and more would all
contribute to a more natural flow of connection between the two parties
than might be apparent when dialogues are condensed in print.
“Murderer, Assassin, Child-Killer!”
I was presenting Nonviolent Communication to about 170 Palestinian
Muslim men in a mosque at Dheisheh Refugee Camp in Bethlehem.
Attitudes toward Americans at that time were not favorable. As I was
speaking, I suddenly noticed a wave of muffled commotion fluttering
through the audience. “They’re whispering that you are American!”
my translator alerted me, just as a gentleman in the audience leapt to
his feet. Facing me squarely, he hollered at the top of his lungs,
“Murderer!” Immediately a dozen other voices joined him in chorus:
“Assassin!” “Child-killer!” “Murderer!”
Fortunately, I was able to focus my attention on what the man was
feeling and needing. In this case, I had some cues. On the way into the
refugee camp, I had seen several empty tear gas canisters that had
been shot into the camp the night before. Clearly marked on each
canister were the words Made in U.S.A. I knew that the refugees
harbored a lot of anger toward the United States for supplying tear gas

=== PAGE 28 ===
and other weapons to Israel.
I addressed the man who had called me a murderer:
MBR: Are you angry because you would like my government to use its resources
differently? (I didn’t know whether my guess was correct—what was critical was my
sincere effort to connect with his feeling and need.)
Man: Damn right I’m angry! You think we need tear gas? We need sewers, not your tear
gas! We need housing! We need to have our own country!
MBR: So you’re furious and would appreciate some support in improving your living
conditions and gaining political independence?
Man: Do you know what it’s like to live here for twenty-seven years the way I have with my
family—children and all? Have you got the faintest idea what that’s been like for
us?
MBR: Sounds like you’re feeling very desperate and you’re wondering whether I or anybody
else can really understand what it’s like to be living under these conditions. Am I
hearing you right?
Man: You want to understand? Tell me, do you have children? Do they go to school? Do
they have playgrounds? My son is sick! He plays in open sewage! His classroom
has no books! Have you seen a school that has no books?
MBR: I hear how painful it is for you to raise your children here; you’d like me to know
that what you want is what all parents want for their children—a good
education, opportunity to play and grow in a healthy environment …
Man: That’s right, the basics! Human rights—isn’t that what you Americans call it? Why
don’t more of you come here and see what kind of human rights you’re bringing
here!
MBR: You’d like more Americans to be aware of the enormity of the suffering here and to
look more deeply at the consequences of our political actions?
Our dialogue continued, with him expressing his pain for nearly
twenty more minutes, and me listening for the feeling and need

=== PAGE 29 ===
behind each statement. I didn’t agree or disagree. I received his words,
not as attacks, but as gifts from a fellow human willing to share his
soul and deep vulnerabilities with me.
Once the gentleman felt understood, he was able to hear me explain
my purpose for being at the camp. An hour later, the same man who
had called me a murderer was inviting me to his home for a Ramadan
dinner.

=== PAGE 30 ===
I
CHAPTER TWO
Communication That Blocks Compassion
Do not judge, and you will not be judged.
For as you judge others, so you will yourselves be judged...
—Holy Bible, Matthew 7:1
n studying the question of what alienates us from our natural state of
compassion, I have identified specific forms of language and
communication that I believe contribute to our behaving violently
toward each other and ourselves. I use the term life-alienating
communication to refer to these forms of communication.
Certain ways of communicating alienate us from our natural state of
compassion.
Moralistic Judgments
One kind of life-alienating communication is the use of moralistic
judgments that imply wrongness or badness on the part of people who
don’t act in harmony with our values. Such judgments are reflected in
language: “The problem with you is that you’re too selfish.” “She’s lazy.”
“They’re prejudiced.” “It’s inappropriate.” Blame, insults, put-downs,
labels, criticism, comparisons, and diagnoses are all forms of judgment.
In the world of judgments, our concern centers on “who is what.”
The Sufi poet Rumi once wrote, “Out beyond ideas of wrongdoing and
right-doing, there is a field. I’ll meet you there.” Life-alienating
communication, however, traps us in a world of ideas about rightness
and wrongness—a world of judgments. It is a language rich with words
that classify and dichotomize people and their actions. When we speak
this language, we judge others and their behavior while preoccupying
ourselves with who’s good, bad, normal, abnormal, responsible,
irresponsible, smart, ignorant, etc.

=== PAGE 31 ===
Long before I reached adulthood, I learned to communicate in an
impersonal way that did not require me to reveal what was going on
inside myself. When I encountered people or behaviors I either didn’t
like or didn’t understand, I would react in terms of their wrongness. If
my teachers assigned a task I didn’t want to do, they were “mean” or
“unreasonable.” If someone pulled out in front of me in traffic, my
reaction would be, “You idiot!” When we speak this language, we think
and communicate in terms of what’s wrong with others for behaving in
certain ways or, occasionally, what’s wrong with ourselves for not
understanding or responding as we would like. Our attention is focused
on classifying, analyzing, and determining levels of wrongness rather
than on what we and others need and are not getting. Thus if my partner
wants more affection than I’m giving her, she is “needy and
Analyses of others are actually expressions of our own needs and
values. dependent.” But if I want more affection than she is giving me,
then she is “aloof and insensitive.” If my colleague is more concerned
about details than I am, he is “picky and compulsive.” On the other
hand, if I am more concerned about details than he is, he is “sloppy
and disorganized.”
It is my belief that all such analyses of other human beings are tragic
expressions of our own values and needs. They are tragic because when
we express our values and needs in this form, we increase defensiveness
and resistance among the very people whose behaviors are of concern to
us. Or, if people do agree to act in harmony with our values, they will
likely do so out of fear, guilt, or shame because they concur with our
analysis of their wrongness.
We all pay dearly when people respond to our values and needs not
out of a desire to give from the heart, but out of fear, guilt, or shame.
Sooner or later, we will experience the consequences of diminished
goodwill on the part of those who comply with our values out of a sense
of either external or internal coercion. They, too, pay emotionally, for
they are likely to feel resentment and decreased self-esteem when they
respond to us out of fear, guilt, or shame. Furthermore, each time others
associate us in their minds with any of those feelings, the likelihood of

=== PAGE 32 ===
their responding compassionately to our needs and values in the future
decreases.
It is important here not to confuse value judgments and moralistic
judgments. All of us make value judgments as to the qualities we value in
life; for example, we might value honesty, freedom, or peace. Value
judgments reflect our beliefs of how life can best be served. We make
moralistic judgments of people and behaviors that fail to support our
value judgments; for example, “Violence is bad. People who kill others
are evil.” Had we been raised speaking a language that facilitated the
expression of compassion, we would have learned to articulate our needs
and values directly, rather than to insinuate wrongness when they have
not been met. For example, instead of “Violence is bad,” we might say
instead, “I am fearful of the use of violence to resolve conflicts; I value
the resolution of human conflicts through other means.”
The relationship between language and violence is the subject of
psychology professor O.J. Harvey’s research at the University of
Colorado. He took random samples of pieces of literature from many
countries around the world and tabulated the frequency of words that
classify and judge people. His study shows a high correlation between
frequent use of such words and frequency of incidents. It does not
surprise me to hear that there is considerably less violence in cultures
where people think in terms of human needs than in cultures where
people label one another as “good” or “bad” and believe that the “bad”
ones deserve to be punished. In 75 percent of the television programs
shown during hours when American children are most likely to be
watching, the hero either kills people or beats them up. This violence
typically constitutes the “climax” of the show. Viewers, having been
taught that bad guys deserve to be punished, take pleasure in watching
this violence.
Classifying and judging people promotes violence.
At the root of much, if not all, violence—whether verbal,
psychological, or physical, whether among family members, tribes, or
nations—is a kind of thinking that attributes the cause of conflict to
wrongness in one’s adversaries, and a corresponding inability to think of
oneself or others in terms of vulnerability—that is, what one might be

=== PAGE 33 ===
feeling, fearing, yearning for, missing, etc. We saw this dangerous way of
thinking during the Cold War. Our leaders viewed the U.S.S.R. as an
“evil empire” bent on destroying the American way of life. Soviet leaders
referred to the people of the United States as “imperialist oppressors”
who were trying to subjugate them. Neither side acknowledged the fear
lurking behind such labels.
Making Comparisons
Another form of judgment is the use of comparisons. In his bookHow to
Make Yourself Miserable, Dan Greenburg demonstrates through humor
the insidious power that comparative thinking can exert over us. He
suggests that if readers have a sincere desire to make life miserable for
themselves, they might learn to compare themselves to other people. For
those unfamiliar with this practice, he provides a few exercises. The first
one displays full-length pictures of a man and a woman who embody
ideal physical beauty by contemporary media standards.
Comparisons are a form of judgment
Readers are instructed to take their own body measurements, compare
them to those superimposed on the pictures of the attractive specimens,
and dwell on the differences.
This exercise produces what it promises: we start to feel miserable as
we engage in these comparisons. By the time we’re as depressed as we
think possible, we turn the page to discover that the first exercise was a
mere warm-up. Since physical beauty is relatively superficial, Greenburg
next provides an opportunity to compare ourselves on something that
matters: achievement. He turns to the phone book to give readers a few
random individuals to compare themselves with. The first name he
claims to have pulled out of the phone book is Wolfgang Amadeus
Mozart. Greenburg lists the languages Mozart spoke and the major pieces
he had composed by the time he was a teenager. The exercise then
instructs readers to reflect on their own achievements at their current
stage of life, to compare them with what Mozart had accomplished by
age twelve, and to dwell on the differences.
Even readers who never emerge from the self-induced misery of this

=== PAGE 34 ===
exercise might see how powerfully this type of thinking blocks
compassion, both for oneself and for others.
Denial of Responsibility
Another kind of life-alienating communication is denial of responsibility.
Communication is life-alienating when it clouds our awareness that we
are each responsible for our own thoughts, feelings, and actions. The use
of the common expression have to, as in “There are some things you have
to do, whether you like it or not,” illustrates how personal responsibility
for our actions can be obscured in speech. The phrase makes one feel, as
in “You make me feel guilty,” is another example of how language
facilitates denial of personal responsibility for our own feelings and
thoughts.
Our language obscures awareness of personal responsibility.
In her book Eichmann in Jerusalem, which documents the war crimes trial
of Nazi officer Adolf Eichmann, Hannah Arendt quotes Eichmann saying
that he and his fellow officers had their own name for the responsibility-
denying language they used. They called it Amtssprache, loosely
translated into English as “office talk” or “bureaucratese.” For example,
if asked why they took a certain action, the response would be, “I had
to.” If asked why they “had to,” the answer would be, “Superiors’
orders.” “Company policy.” “It was the law.”
We deny responsibility for our actions when we attribute their cause
to factors outside ourselves:
Vague, impersonal forces—“I cleaned my room because I had
to.”
Our condition, diagnosis, or personal or psychological
history—“I drink because I am an alcoholic.”
The actions of others—”I hit my child because he ran into the
street.”
The dictates of authority—”I lied to the client because the
boss told me to.”
Group pressure—”I started smoking because all my friends

=== PAGE 35 ===
did.”
Institutional policies, rules, and regulations—“I have to
suspend you for this infraction because it’s the school policy.”
Gender roles, social roles, or age roles—“I hate going to
work, but I do it because I am a husband and a father.”
Uncontrollable impulses—”I was overcome by my urge to eat
the candy bar.”
Once, during a discussion among parents and teachers on the dangers
of a language that implies absence of choice, a woman objected angrily,
“But there are some things you have to do whether you like it or not!
And I see nothing wrong with telling my children that there are things
they have to do, too.” Asked for an example of something she “had to
do,” she retorted, “That’s easy! When I leave here tonight, I have to go
home and cook. I hate cooking! I hate it with a passion, but I have been
doing it every day for twenty years, even when I’ve been as sick as a
dog, because it’s one of those things you just have to do.” I told her I was
sad to hear her spending so much of her life doing something she hated,
because she felt compelled to, and I just hoped that she might find
happier possibilities by learning the language of NVC.
I am pleased to report that she was a fast learner. At the end of the
workshop, she actually went home and announced to her family that she
no longer wanted to cook. The opportunity for some feedback from her
family came three weeks later when her two sons arrived at a workshop.
I was curious to know how they had reacted to their mother’s
announcement. The elder son sighed, “Marshall, I just said to myself,
‘Thank God!’” Seeing my puzzled look, he explained, “I thought to
myself, maybe finally she won’t be complaining at every meal!”
We can replace language that implies lack of choice with language
that acknowledges choice.
 
Another time, when I was consulting for a school district, a teacher
remarked, “I hate giving grades. I don’t think they are helpful and they
create a lot of anxiety on the part of students. But I have to give grades:
it’s the district policy.” We had just been practicing how to introduce

=== PAGE 36 ===
language in the classroom that heightens consciousness of responsibility
for one’s actions. I suggested that the teacher translate the statement “I
have to give grades because it’s district policy” to “I choose to give
grades because I want … “ She answered without hesitation, “I choose to
give grades because I want to keep my job,” while hastening to add, “But
I don’t like saying it that way. It makes me feel so responsible for what
I’m doing.”
We are dangerous when we are not conscious of our responsibility for
how we behave, think, and feel.
“That’s why I want you to do it that way,” I replied.
I share the sentiments of French novelist and journalist George
Bernanos when he says,
I have thought for a long time now that if, some day, the increasing efficiency for
the technique of destruction finally causes our species to disappear from the earth,
it will not be cruelty that will be responsible for our extinction and still less, of
course, the indignation that cruelty awakens and the reprisals and vengeance that it
brings upon itself … but the docility, the lack of responsibility of the modern man,
his base subservient acceptance of every common decree. The horrors that we have
seen, the still greater horrors we shall presently see, are not signs that rebels,
insubordinate, untamable men are increasing in number throughout the world, but
rather that there is a constant increase in the number of obedient, docile men.
—George Bernanos
Other Forms of Life-Alienating Communication
Communicating our desires as demands is yet another form of language
that blocks compassion. A demand explicitly or implicitly threatens
listeners with blame or punishment if they fail to comply. It is a common
form of communication in our culture, especially among those who hold
positions of authority.
My children gave me some invaluable lessons about demands.
Somehow I had gotten it into my head that, as a parent, my job was to
make demands. I learned, however, that I could make all the demands in
the world but still couldn’t make my children do anything. This is a

=== PAGE 37 ===
humbling lesson in power for those of us who believe that, because we’re
a parent, teacher, or manager, our job is to change other people and
make them behave.
We can never make people do anything.
Here were these youngsters letting me know that I couldn’t make them
do anything. All I could do was make them wish they had— through
punishment. Then eventually they taught me that any time I was foolish
enough to make them wish they had complied by punishing them, they
had ways of making me wish that I hadn’t!
We will examine this subject again when we learn to differentiate
requests from demands—an important part of NVC.
The concept that certain actions merit reward while others merit
punishment is also associated with life-alienating communication. This
thinking is expressed by the word deserve as
Thinking based on “who deserves what” blocks compassionate
communication.
in “He deserves to be punished for what he did.” It assumes “badness”
on the part of people who behave in certain ways, and it calls for
punishment to make them repent and change their behavior. I believe it
is in everyone’s interest that people change, not in order to avoid
punishment, but because they see the change as benefiting themselves.
Life-alienating communication has deep philosophical and political
roots.
Most of us grew up speaking a language that encourages us to label,
compare, demand, and pronounce judgments rather than to be aware of
what we are feeling and needing. I believe life-alienating communication
is rooted in views of human nature that have exerted their influence for
several centuries.
These views stress humans’ innate evil and deficiency, and a need for
education to control our inherently undesirable nature. Such education
often leaves us questioning whether there is something wrong with
whatever feelings and needs we may be experiencing. We learn early to

=== PAGE 38 ===
cut ourselves off from what’s going on within ourselves.
Life-alienating communication both stems from and supports
hierarchical or domination societies, where large populations are
controlled by a small number of individuals to those individuals, own
benefit. It would be in the interest of kings, czars, nobles, and so forth
that the masses be educated in a way that renders them slavelike in
mentality. The language of wrongness, should, and have to is perfectly
suited for this purpose: the more people are trained to think in terms of
moralistic judgments that imply wrongness and badness, the more they
are being trained to look outside themselves—to outside authorities—for
the definition of what constitutes right, wrong, good, and bad. When we
are in contact with our feelings and needs, we humans no longer make
good slaves and underlings.
Summary
It is our nature to enjoy giving and receiving compassionately. We have,
however, learned many forms of life-alienating communication that lead
us to speak and behave in ways that injure others and ourselves. One
form of life-alienating communication is the use of moralistic judgments
that imply wrongness or badness on the part of those who don’t act in
harmony with our values. Another is the use of comparisons, which can
block compassion both for others and for ourselves. Life-alienating
communication also obscures our awareness that we are each
responsible for our own thoughts, feelings, and actions. Communicating
our desires in the form of demands is yet another characteristic of
language that blocks compassion.

=== PAGE 39 ===
T
CHAPTER THREE
Observing Without Evaluating
“OBSERVE!! There are few things as
important, as religious, as that.”
—Frederick Buechner, minister
I can handle your telling me
what I did or didn’t do.
And I can handle your interpretations, but please don’t mix the two.
If you want to confuse any issue, I can tell you how to do it:
Mix together what I do
with how you react to it.
Tell me that you’re disappointed
with the unfinished chores you see, But calling me “irresponsible”
is no way to motivate me.
And tell me that you’re feeling hurt
when I say “no” to your advances, But calling me a frigid man
won’t increase your future chances.
Yes, I can handle your telling me
what I did or didn’t do,
And I can handle your interpretations, but please don’t mix the two.
—Marshall B. Rosenberg, Ph.D.
he first component of NVC entails the separation of observation from
evaluation. We need to clearly observe what we are seeing, hearing,
or touching that is affecting our sense of well-being, without mixing in

=== PAGE 40 ===
any evaluation.
Observations are an important element in NVC, where we wish to
clearly and honestly express how we are to another person. When we
combine observation with evaluation, we decrease the likelihood that
others will hear our intended message. Instead, they are apt to hear
criticism and thus resist whatever we are saying.
NVC does not mandate that we remain completely objective and
refrain from evaluating. It only requires that we maintain a separation
between our observations and our evaluations. NVC is a process
language that discourages static generalizations; instead, evaluations are
to be based on observations specific to time and context. Semanticist
Wendell Johnson pointed out that we create many problems for
ourselves by
When we combine observation with evaluation, people are apt to hear
criticism.
using static language to express or capture a reality that is ever
changing: “Our language is an imperfect instrument created by ancient
and ignorant men. It is an animistic language that invites us to talk
about stability and constants, about similarities and normal and kinds,
about magical transformations, quick cures, simple problems, and final
solutions. Yet the world we try to symbolize with this language is a
world 
of 
process, 
change, 
differences, 
dimensions, 
functions,
relationships, growths, interactions, developing, learning, coping,
complexity. And the mismatch of our ever-changing world and our
relatively static language forms is part of our problem.”
A colleague of mine, Ruth Bebermeyer, contrasts static and process
language in a song that illustrates the difference between evaluation and
observation:
I’ve never seen a lazy man;
I’ve seen a man who never ran
while I watched him, and I’ve seen
a man who sometimes slept between
lunch and dinner, and who’d stay
at home upon a rainy day,

=== PAGE 41 ===
but he was not a lazy man.
Before you call me crazy,
think, was he a lazy man or
did he just do things we label “lazy”?
I’ve never seen a stupid kid;
I’ve seen a kid who sometimes did
things I didn’t understand
or things in ways I hadn’t planned;
I’ve seen a kid who hadn’t seen
the same places where I had been, but he was not a stupid kid.
Before you call him stupid,
think, was he a stupid kid or did he
just know different things than you did?
I’ve looked as hard as I can look
but never ever seen a cook;
I saw a person who combined
ingredients on which we dined, A person who turned on the heat
and watched the stove that cooked the meat—
I saw those things but not a cook.
Tell me, when you’re looking, Is it a cook you see or is it someone
doing things that we call cooking?
What some of us call lazy
some call tired or easy-going, what some of us call stupid
some just call a different knowing, so I’ve come to the conclusion, it will
save us all confusion
if we don’t mix up what we cansee
with what is our opinion.

=== PAGE 42 ===
Because you may, I want to sayalso;
I know that’s only my opinion.
—Ruth Bebermeyer
While the effects of negative labels such as “lazy” and “stupid” may be
more obvious, even a positive or an apparently neutral label such as
“cook” limits our perception of the totality of another person’s being.
The Highest Form of Human Intelligence
The Indian philosopher J. Krishnamurti once remarked that observing
without evaluating is the highest form of human intelligence. When I
first read this statement, the thought, “What nonsense!” shot through my
mind before I realized that I had just made an evaluation. For most of us,
it is difficult to make observations, especially of people and their
behavior, that are free of judgment, criticism, or other forms of analysis.
I became acutely aware of this difficulty while working with an
elementary school where the staff and principal had often reported
communication difficulties. The district superintendent had requested
that I help them resolve the conflict. First I was to confer with the staff,
and then with the staff and principal together.
I opened the meeting by asking the staff, “What is the principal doing
that conflicts with your needs?”
“He has a big mouth!” came the swift response. My question called for
an observation, but while “big mouth” gave me information on how this
teacher evaluated the principal, it failed to describe what the principal
said or did that led to the interpretation that he had a “big mouth.”
When I pointed this out, a second teacher offered, “I know what he
means: the principal talks too much!” Instead of a clear observation of
the principal’s behavior, this was also an evaluation—of how much the
principal talked. A third teacher then declared, “He thinks only he has
anything worth saying.” I explained that inferring what another person
is thinking is not the same as observing his behavior. Finally a fourth
teacher ventured, “He wants to be the center of attention all the time.”
After I remarked that this too was an inference—of what another person
is wanting—two teachers blurted in unison, “Well, your question is very

=== PAGE 43 ===
hard to answer!”
We subsequently worked together to create a list identifying specific
behaviors, on the part of the principal, that bothered them, and made
sure that the list was free of evaluation. For example, the principal told
stories about his childhood and war experiences during faculty meetings,
with the result that meetings sometimes ran twenty minutes overtime.
When I asked whether they had ever communicated their annoyance to
the principal, the staff replied that they had tried, but only through
evaluative comments. They had never made reference to specific
behaviors—such as his storytelling—and they agreed to bring these up
when we were all to meet together.
Almost as soon as the meeting began, I saw what the staff had been
telling me. No matter what was being discussed, the principal would
interject, “This reminds me of the time … “ and then launch into a story
about his childhood or war experience. I waited for the staff to voice
their discomfort around the principal’s behavior. However, instead of
Nonviolent Communication, they applied nonverbal condemnation.
Some rolled their eyes; others yawned pointedly; one stared at his
watch.
I endured this painful scenario until finally I asked, “Isn’t anyone
going to say something?” An awkward silence ensued. The teacher who
had spoken first at our meeting screwed up his courage, looked directly
at the principal, and said, “Ed, you have a big mouth.”
As this story illustrates, it’s not always easy to shed our old habits and
master the ability to separate observation from evaluation. Eventually,
the teachers succeeded in clarifying for the principal the specific actions
that led to their concern. The principal listened earnestly and then
pressed, “Why didn’t one of you tell me before?” He admitted he was
aware of his storytelling habit, and then began a story pertaining to this
habit! I interrupted him, observing (good-naturedly) that he was doing it
again. We ended our meeting by developing ways for the staff to let their
principal know, in a gentle way, when his stories weren’t appreciated.
Distinguishing Observations From Evaluations
The following table distinguishes observations that are separate from

=== PAGE 44 ===
evaluation from those that have evaluation mixed in.
Communication
Example of
observation with
evaluation mixed
in
Example of observation
separate from evaluation
1. Use of verb to be without indication that
the evaluator takes responsibility for the
evaluation
You are too
generous.
When I see you give all your
lunch money to others, I think
you are being too generous.
2. Use of verbs with evaluative
connotations
Doug procrastinates.
Doug only studies for exams
the night before.
3. Implication that one’s inferences about
another person’s thoughts, feelings,
intentions, or desires are the only ones
possible
She won’t get her
work in.
I don’t think she’ll gether work
in.orShe said, “I won’t getmy
work in.”
4. Confusion of prediction with certainty
If you don’t eat
balanced meals,
your health will be
impaired.
If you don’t eat balanced
meals, I fear your health may
be impaired.
5. Failure to be specific about referents
Immigrants don’t
take care of their
property.
I have not seen the immigrant
family living at 1679 Ross
shovel the snow on their
sidewalk.
6. Use of words denoting ability without
indicating that an evaluation is being
made
Hank Smith is a
poor soccer player.
Hank Smith has not scored a
goal in twenty games.
7. Use of adverbs and adjectives in ways
that do not indicate an evaluation has
been made
Jim is ugly.
Jim’s looks don’t appeal to me.
Note: The words always, never, ever, whenever, etc. express observations
when used in the following ways:
Whenever I have observed Jack on the phone, he has

=== PAGE 45 ===
spoken for at least thirty minutes.
I cannot recall your ever writing to me.
Sometimes such words are used as exaggerations, in which case
observations and evaluations are being mixed:
You are always busy.
She is never there when she’s needed.
When these words are used as exaggerations, they often provoke
defensiveness rather than compassion.
Words like frequently and seldom can also contribute to confusing
observation with evaluation.
Evaluations
Observations
You seldom do what I
want.
The last three times I initiated an activity, you said you didn’t want to
do it.
He frequently comes
over.
He comes over at least three times a week.
Summary
The first component of NVC entails the separation of observation from
evaluation. When we combine observation with evaluation, others are
apt to hear criticism and resist what we are saying. NVC is a process
language that discourages static generalizations. Instead, observations
are to be made specific to time and context, for example, “Hank Smith
has not scored a goal in twenty games,” rather than “Hank Smith is a
poor soccer player.”
NVC in Action
“The Most Arrogant Speaker We’ve Ever Had!”
This dialogue occurred during a workshop I was conducting. About half an hour
into my presentation, I paused to invite reactions from the participants. One of
them raised a hand and declared, “You’re the most arrogant speaker we’ve ever

=== PAGE 46 ===
had!”
I have several options open to me when people address me this way. One option
is to take the message personally; I know I’m doing this when I have a strong urge
to either grovel, defend myself, or make excuses. Another option (for which I am
well-rehearsed) is to attack the other person for what I perceive as their attack
upon me. On this occasion, I chose a third option by focusing on what might be
going on behind the man’s statement.
MBR: (guessing at the observations being made) Are you reacting to my having
taken thirty straight minutes to present my views before giving you a
chance to talk?
Phil: No, you make it sound so simple.
MBR: (trying to obtain further clarification) Are you reacting to my not having said
anything about how the process can be difficult for some people to
apply?
Phil: No, not some people—you!
MBR: So you’re reacting to my not having said that the process can be difficult
for me at times?
Phil: That’s right.
MBR: Are you feeling annoyed because you would have liked some sign from me
that indicated that I have some problems with the process myself?
Phil: (after a moment’s pause) That’s right.
MBR: (feeling more relaxed now that I am in touch with the person’s feeling and need,
I direct my attention to what he might be requesting of me) Would you like
me to admit right now that this process can be a struggle for me to
apply?
Phil: Yes.
MBR: (having gotten clear on his observation, feeling, need, and request, I check inside
myself to see if I am willing to do as he requests) Yes, this process is often
difficult for me. As we continue with the workshop, you’ll probably
hear me describe several incidents where I’ve struggled … or
completely lost touch … with this process, this consciousness, that I am
presenting here to you. But what keeps me in the struggle are the close
connections to other people that happen when I do stay with the

=== PAGE 47 ===
process.
Exercise 1
OBSERVATION OR EVALUATION?
To determine your proficiency at discerning between observations and
evaluations, complete the following exercise. Circle the number in front
of each statement that is an observation only, with no evaluation mixed
in.
1. “John was angry with me yesterday for no reason.”
2. “Yesterday evening Nancy bit her fingernails while
watching television.”
3. “Sam didn’t ask for my opinion during the meeting.”
4. “My father is a good man.”
5. “Janice works too much.”
6. “Henry is aggressive.”
7. “Pam was first in line every day this week.”
8. “My son often doesn’t brush his teeth.”
9. “Luke told me I didn’t look good in yellow.”
10. “My aunt complains when I talk with her.”
Here are my responses for Exercise 1:
1. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I
consider “for no reason” to be an evaluation. Furthermore,
I consider it an evaluation to infer that John was angry. He
might have been feeling hurt, scared, sad, or something
else. Examples of observations without evaluation might
be: “John told me he was angry,” or “John pounded his fist
on the table.”
2. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that an
observation was expressed without being mixed together
with an evaluation.
3. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that an
observation was expressed without being mixed together
with an evaluation.
4. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I

=== PAGE 48 ===
consider “good man” to be an evaluation. An observation
without evaluation might be: “For the last twenty-five
years, my father has given one-tenth of his salary to
charity.”
5. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I
consider “too much” to be an evaluation. An observation
without evaluation might be: “Janice spent more than sixty
hours at the office this week.”
6. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I
consider “aggressive” to be an evaluation. An observation
without evaluation might be: “Henry hit his sister when
she switched the television channel.”
7. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that an
observation was expressed without being mixed together
with an evaluation.
8. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I
consider “often” to be an evaluation. An observation
without evaluation might be: “Twice this week my son
didn’t brush his teeth before going to bed.”
9. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that an
observation was expressed without being mixed together
with an evaluation.
10. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I
consider “complains” to be an evaluation. An observation
without evaluation might be: “My aunt called me three
times this week, and each time talked about people who
treated her in ways she didn’t like.”
The Mask
Always a mask
Held in the slim hand whitely
Always she had a mask before her face—
Truly the wrist
Holding it lightly

=== PAGE 49 ===
Fitted the task:
Sometimes however
Was there a shiver,
Fingertip quiver,
Ever so slightly—
Holding the mask?
For years and years and years I wondered
But dared not ask
And then—
I blundered,
Looked behind the mask,
To find
Nothing—
She had no face.
She had become
Merely a hand
Holding a mask
With grace.
—Author unknown

=== PAGE 50 ===
CHAPTER FOUR

=== PAGE 51 ===
T
Identifying and Expressing Feelings
he first component of NVC is to observe without evaluating; the
second component is to express how we are feeling. Psychoanalyst
Rollo May suggests that “the mature person becomes able to differentiate
feelings into as many nuances, strong and passionate experiences, or
delicate and sensitive ones as in the different passages of music in a
symphony.” For many of us, however, our feelings are, as May would
describe it, “limited like notes in a bugle call.”
The Heavy Cost of Unexpressed Feelings
Our repertoire of words for calling people names is often larger than our
vocabulary of words to clearly describe our emotional states. I went
through twenty-one years of American schools and can’t recall anyone in
all that time ever asking me how I felt. Feelings were simply not
considered important. What was valued was “the right way to think”—as
defined by those who held positions of rank and authority. We are
trained to be “other-directed” rather than to be in contact with
ourselves. We learn to be “up in our head,” wondering, “What is it that
others think is right for me to say and do?”
An interaction I had with a teacher when I was about nine years old
demonstrates how alienation from our feelings can begin. I once hid
myself in a classroom after school because some boys were waiting
outside to beat me up. A teacher spotted me and asked me to leave the
school. When I explained I was afraid to go, she declared, “Big boys
don’t get frightened.” A few years later I received further reinforcement
through my participation in athletics. It was typical for coaches to value
athletes willing to “give their all” and continue playing no matter how
much physical pain they were in. I learned the lesson so well I once
continued playing baseball for a month with an untreated broken wrist.
At an NVC workshop, a college student spoke about being kept awake
by a roommate who played the stereo late at night and loudly. When
asked to express what he felt when this happened, the student replied, “I
feel that it isn’t right to play music so loud at night.” I pointed out that

=== PAGE 52 ===
when he followed the word feel with the word that, he was expressing an
opinion but not revealing his feelings. Asked to try again to express his
feelings, he responded, “I feel, when people do something like that, it’s a
personality disturbance.” I explained that this was still an opinion rather
than a feeling. He paused thoughtfully, and then announced with
vehemence, “I have no feelings about it whatsoever!”
This student obviously had strong feelings. Unfortunately, he didn’t
know how to become aware of his feelings, let alone express them. This
difficulty in identifying and expressing feelings is common, and in my
experience, especially so among lawyers, engineers, police officers,
corporate managers, and career military personnel—people whose
professional codes discourage them from manifesting emotions. For
families, the toll is severe when members are unable to communicate
emotions. Country singer Reba McEntire wrote a song after her father’s
death, and titled it “The Greatest Man I Never Knew.” In so doing, she
undoubtedly expressed the sentiments of many people who were never
able to establish the emotional connection they would have liked with
their fathers.
I regularly hear statements like, “I wouldn’t want you to get the wrong
idea—I’m married to a wonderful man—but I never know what he is
feeling.” One such dissatisfied woman brought her spouse to a workshop,
during which she told him, “I feel like I’m married to a wall.” The
husband then did an excellent imitation of a wall: he sat mute and
immobile. Exasperated, she turned to me and exclaimed, “See! This is
what happens all the time. He sits and says nothing. It’s just like living
with a wall.”
“It sounds to me like you are feeling lonely and wanting more
emotional contact with your husband,” I responded. When she agreed, I
tried to show how statements such as “I feel like I’m living with a wall”
are unlikely to bring her feelings and desires to her husband’s attention.
In fact, they are more likely to be heard as criticism than as invitations
to connect with our feelings. Furthermore, such statements often lead to
self-fulfilling prophecies. A husband, for example, hears himself
criticized for behaving like a wall; he is hurt and discouraged and
doesn’t respond, thereby confirming his wife’s image of him as a wall.
The benefits of strengthening our feelings vocabulary are evident not

=== PAGE 53 ===
only in intimate relationships but also in the professional world. I was
once hired to consult with members of a technological department of a
large Swiss corporation; they were troubled by the discovery that
workers in other departments were avoiding them. When asked,
employees from other departments responded, “We hate going there to
consult with those people. It’s like talking to a bunch of machines!” The
problem abated when I spent time with the members of the
technological department, encouraging them to express more of their
humanness in their communications with co-workers.
In another instance, I was working with hospital administrators who
were anxious about a forthcoming meeting with the hospital’s
physicians. The administrators were eager to have me demonstrate how
they might use NVC when approaching the physicians for support for a
project that had only recently been turned down by a vote of 17 to 1.
Assuming the voice of an administrator in a role-playing session, I
opened with, “I’m feeling frightened to be bringing up this issue.” I
chose to start this way because I sensed how frightened the
administrators were as they prepared to confront the physicians on this
topic again. Before I could continue, one of the administrators stopped
me to protest, “You’re being unrealistic! We could never tell the
physicians that we were frightened.”
When I asked why an admission of fear seemed so impossible, he
replied without hesitation, “If we admitted we’re frightened, then they
would just pick us to pieces!” His answer didn’t surprise me; I have often
heard people say they cannot imagine ever expressing feelings at their
workplace. I was pleased to learn, however, that one of the
administrators did decide to risk expressing his vulnerability at the
dreaded meeting. Departing from his customary manner of appearing
strictly logical, rational, and unemotional, he chose to state his feelings
together with his reasons for wanting the physicians to change their
position. He noticed how differently the physicians responded to him. In
the end he was amazed and relieved when, instead of “picking him to
pieces,” the physicians reversed their previous position and voted 17 to
1 to support the project instead. This dramatic turn-around helped the
administrators realize and appreciate the potential impact of expressing
vulnerability—even in the workplace.

=== PAGE 54 ===
Expressing our vulnerability can help resolve conflicts.
Finally, let me share a personal incident that taught me the effects of
hiding our feelings. I was teaching a course in NVC to a group of inner
city students. When I walked into the room the first day, the students,
who had been enjoying a lively conversation with each other, became
quiet. “Good morning!” I greeted. Silence. I felt very uncomfortable, but
was afraid to express it. Instead, I proceeded in my most professional
manner: “For this class, we will be studying a process of communication
that I hope you will find helpful in your relationships at home and with
your friends.”
I continued to present information about NVC, but no one seemed to
be listening. One girl, rummaging through her bag, fished out a file and
began vigorously filing her nails. Students near the windows glued their
faces to the panes as if fascinated by what was going on in the street
below. I felt increasingly more uncomfortable, yet continued to say
nothing about it. Finally, a student who had certainly more courage than
I was demonstrating, piped up, “You just hate being with black people,
don’t you?” I was stunned, yet immediately realized how I had
contributed to this student’s perception by trying to hide my discomfort.
“I am feeling nervous,” I admitted, “but not because you are black. My
feelings have to do with my not knowing anyone here and wanting to be
accepted when I came in the room.” My expression of vulnerability had
a pronounced effect on the students. They started to ask questions about
me, to tell me things about themselves, and to express curiosity about
NVC.
Feelings versus Non-Feelings
A common confusion, generated by the English language, is our use of
the word feel without actually expressing a feeling. For example, in the
sentence, “I feel I didn’t get a fair deal,” the words I feel could be more
accurately replaced with I think. In general, feelings are not being clearly
expressed when the word feel is followed by:
Distinguish feelings from thoughts.

=== PAGE 55 ===
1. Words such as that, like, as if: “I feel that you should know
better.” “I feel like a failure.” “I feel as if I’m living with a
wall.”
2. The pronouns I, you, he, she, they, it: “I feel I am constantly
on call.” “I feel it is useless.”
3. Names or nouns referring to people: “I feel Amy has been
pretty responsible.” “I feel my boss is being manipulative.”
Distinguish between what we feel and what we think we are.
Conversely, in the English language, it is not necessary to use the word
feel at all when we are actually expressing a feeling: we can say, “I’m
feeling irritated,” or simply, “I’m irritated.”
In NVC, we distinguish between words that express actual feelings and
those that describe what we think we are.
1. Description of what we think we are: “I feel inadequate as a
guitar player.” In this statement, I am assessing my ability
as a guitar player, rather than clearly expressing my
feelings.
2. Expressions of actual feelings: “I feel disappointed in myself
as a guitar player.” “I feel impatient with myself as a guitar
player.” “I feel frustrated with myself as a guitar player.”
The actual feeling behind my assessment of myself as
“inadequate” 
could 
therefore 
be 
disappointment,
impatience, frustration, or some other emotion.
Likewise, it is helpful to differentiate between words that describe
what we think others are doing around us, and words that describe
actual feelings. The following are examples of statements that are easily
mistaken as expressions of feelings: in fact they reveal more how we think
others are behaving than what we are actually feeling ourselves.
Distinguish between what we feel and how we think others react or
behave toward us.
1. “I feel unimportant to the people with whom I work.” The

=== PAGE 56 ===
word unimportant describes how I think others are
evaluating me, rather than an actual feeling, which in this
situation might be “I feel sad“ or “I feel discouraged.”
2. “I feel misunderstood.” Here the word misunderstood
indicates my assessment of the other person’s level of
understanding rather than an actual feeling. In this
situation, I may be feeling anxious or annoyed or some
other emotion.
3. 3. “I feel ignored.”
Again, this is more of an interpretation of the actions of
others than a clear statement of how we are feeling. No
doubt there have been times we thought we were being
ignored and our feeling was relief, because we wanted to be
left to ourselves. No doubt there were other times,
however, when we felt hurt when we thought we were
being ignored, because we had wanted to be involved.
Words like ignored express how we interpret others, rather than how we
feel. Here is a sampling of such words: abandoned abused attacked
betrayed
boxed-in
bullied
cheated
coerced
co-opted
cornered
diminished
distrusted
interrupted
intimidated
let down
manipulated
misunderstood

=== PAGE 57 ===
neglected
overworked
patronized
pressured
provoked
put down
rejected
taken for granted threatened
unappreciated
unheard
unseen
unsupported
unwanted
used
Building a Vocabulary for Feelings
In expressing our feelings, it helps to use words that refer to specific
emotions, rather than words that are vague or general. For example, if
we say, “I feel good about that,” the word good could mean happy,
excited, relieved, or a number of other emotions. Words such as good
and bad prevent the listener from connecting easily with what we might
actually be feeling.
The following lists have been compiled to help you increase your
power to articulate feelings and clearly describe a whole range of
emotional states.
How we are likely to feel when our needs are being met absorbed
adventurous
affectionate
alert
alive
amazed

=== PAGE 58 ===
amused
animated
appreciative
ardent
aroused
astonished
blissful
breathless
buoyant
calm
carefree
cheerful
comfortable
complacent
composed
concerned
confident
contented
cool
curious
dazzled
delighted
eager
ebullient
ecstatic
effervescent
elated
enchanted
encouraged

=== PAGE 59 ===
energetic
engrossed
enlivened
enthusiastic
excited
exhilarated
expansive
expectant
exultant
fascinated
free
friendly
fulfilled
glad
gleeful
glorious
glowing
good-humored
grateful
gratified
happy
helpful
hopeful
inquisitive
inspired
intense
interested
intrigued
invigorated

=== PAGE 60 ===
involved
joyous, joyful
jubilant
keyed-up
loving
mellow
merry
mirthful
moved
optimistic
overjoyed
overwhelmed
peaceful
perky
pleasant
pleased
proud
quiet
radiant
rapturous
refreshed
relaxed
relieved
satisfied
secure
sensitive
serene
spellbound
splendid

=== PAGE 61 ===
stimulated
surprised
tender
thankful
thrilled
touched
tranquil
trusting
upbeat
warm
wide-awake
wonderful
zestful
How we are likely to feel when our needs are not being met afraid
aggravated
agitated
alarmed
aloof
angry
anguished
annoyed
anxious
apathetic
apprehensive
aroused
ashamed
beat
bewildered
bitter

=== PAGE 62 ===
blah
blue
bored
brokenhearted
chagrined
cold
concerned
confused
cool
cross
dejected
depressed
despairing
despondent
detached
disaffected
disappointed
discouraged
disenchanted
disgruntled
disgusted
disheartened
dismayed
displeased
disquieted
distressed
disturbed
downcast
downhearted

=== PAGE 63 ===
dull
edgy
embarrassed
embittered
exasperated
exhausted
fatigued
fearful
fidgety
forlorn
frightened
frustrated
furious
gloomy
guilty
harried
heavy
helpless
hesitant
horrible
horrified
hostile
hot
humdrum
hurt
impatient
indifferent
intense
irate

=== PAGE 64 ===
irked
irritated
jealous
jittery
keyed-up
lazy
leery
lethargic
listless
lonely
mad
mean
miserable
mopey
morose
mournful
nervous
nettled
numb
overwhelmed
panicky
passive
perplexed
pessimistic
puzzled
rancorous
reluctant
repelled
resentful

=== PAGE 65 ===
restless
sad
scared
sensitive
shaky
shocked
skeptical
sleepy
sorrowful
sorry
spiritless
startled
surprised
suspicious
tepid
terrified
tired
troubled
uncomfortable
unconcerned
uneasy
unglued
unhappy
unnerved
unsteady
upset
uptight
vexed
weary

=== PAGE 66 ===
wistful
withdrawn
woeful
worried
wretched
Summary
The second component necessary for expressing ourselves is feelings. By
developing a vocabulary of feelings that allows us to clearly and
specifically name or identify our emotions, we can connect more easily
with one another. Allowing ourselves to be vulnerable by expressing our
feelings can help resolve conflicts. NVC distinguishes the expression of
actual feelings from words and statements that describe thoughts,
assessments, and interpretations.
Exercise 2
EXPRESSING FEELINGS
If you would like to see whether we’re in agreement about the verbal
expression of feelings, circle the number in front of each of the following
statements in which feelings are verbally expressed.
1. “I feel you don’t love me.”
2. “I’m sad that you’re leaving.”
3. “I feel scared when you say that.”
4. “When you don’t greet me, I feel neglected.”
5. “I’m happy that you can come.”
6. “You’re disgusting.”
7. “I feel like hitting you.”
8. “I feel misunderstood.”
9. “I feel good about what you did for me.” 10. “I’m
worthless.”
Here are my responses for Exercise 2:

=== PAGE 67 ===
1. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I don’t
consider “you don’t love me” to be a feeling. To me, it
expresses what the speaker thinks the other person is
feeling, rather than how the speaker is feeling. Whenever
the words I feel are followed by the words I, you, he, she,
they, it, that, like, or as if, what follows is generally not
what I would consider to be a feeling. An expression of
feeling in this case might be: “I’m sad,” or “I’m feeling
anguished.”
2. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that a
feeling was verbally expressed.
3. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that a
feeling was verbally expressed.
4. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I don’t
consider “neglected” to be a feeling. To me, it expresses
what the speaker thinks the other person is doing to him or
her. An expression of feeling might be: “When you don’t
greet me at the door, I feel lonely.”
5. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that a
feeling was verbally expressed.
6. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I don’t
consider “disgusting” to be a feeling. To me, it expresses
how the speaker thinks about the other person, rather than
how the speaker is feeling. An expression of feeling might
be: “I feel disgusted.”
7. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I don’t
consider “like hitting you” to be a feeling. To me, it
expresses what the speaker imagines doing, rather than
how the speaker is feeling. An expression of feeling might
be: “I am furious at you.”
8. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I don’t
consider “misunderstood” to be a feeling. To me, it
expresses what the speaker thinks the other person is
doing. An expression of feeling in this case might be: “I feel
frustrated,” or “I feel discouraged.”
9. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that a
feeling was verbally expressed. However, the word good is

=== PAGE 68 ===
vague when used to convey a feeling. We can usually
express our feelings more clearly by using other words, for
example: relieved, gratified, or encouraged.
10. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. I don’t
consider “worthless” to be a feeling. To me, it expresses
how the speaker thinks about himself or herself, rather
than how the speaker is feeling. An expression of feeling in
this case might be: “I feel skeptical about my own talents,”
or “I feel wretched.”

