=== PAGE 143 ===
CHAPTER NINE

=== PAGE 144 ===
W
Connecting Compassionately With Ourselves
Let us become the change we seek in the world.
—Mahatma Gandhi
NVC’s most important use may be in developing self-compassion.
e have seen how NVC contributes to relationships with friends and
family, at work and in the political arena. Its most crucial
application, however, may be in the way we treat ourselves. When we
are internally violent toward ourselves, it is difficult to be genuinely
compassionate toward others.
Remembering the Specialness of What We Are
In the play A Thousand Clowns by Herb Gardner, the protagonist refuses
to release his twelve-year-old nephew to child-welfare authorities,
declaring, “I want him to get to know exactly the special thing he is or
else he won’t notice it when it starts to go. I want him to stay awake … I
want to be sure he sees all the wild possibilities. I want him to know it’s
worth all the trouble just to give the world a little goosing when you get
the chance. And I want him to know the subtle, sneaky, important
reason why he was born a human being and not a chair.”
I am gravely concerned that many of us have lost awareness of “the
special thing” we are; we have forgotten the “subtle, sneaky, important
reason” the uncle so passionately wanted his nephew to know. When
critical self-concepts prevent us from seeing the beauty in ourselves, we
lose connection with the divine energy that is our source. Conditioned to
view ourselves as objects—objects full of shortcomings—is it any wonder
that many of us end up relating violently to ourselves?
We use NVC to evaluate ourselves in ways that engender growth
rather than self-hatred.
An important area where this violence can be replaced with
compassion is in our moment-to-moment evaluation of ourselves. Since

=== PAGE 145 ===
we want whatever we do to lead to the enrichment of life, it is critical to
know how to evaluate events and conditions in ways that help us learn
and make ongoing choices that serve us. Unfortunately, the way we’ve
been trained to evaluate ourselves often promotes more self-hatred than
learning.
Evaluating Ourselves When We’ve Been Less Than Perfect
In a routine workshop activity, I ask participants to recall a recent
occasion when they did something they wish they hadn’t. We then look
at how they spoke to themselves immediately after having made what is
referred in common language as a “mistake” or “error.” Typical
statements were: “That was dumb!” “How could you do such a stupid
thing?” “What’s wrong with you?” “You’re always messing up!” “That’s
selfish!”
These speakers had been taught to judge themselves in ways that
imply that what they did was wrong or bad; their self-admonishment
implicitly assumes that they deserve to suffer for what they’ve done. It is
tragic that so many of us get enmeshed in self-hatred rather than benefit
from our mistakes, which show us our limitations and guide us towards
growth.
Even when we sometimes do “learn a lesson” from mistakes for which
we judge ourselves harshly, I worry about the nature of the energy
behind that kind of change and learning. I’d like change to be stimulated
by a clear desire to enrich life for ourselves or for others rather than by
destructive energies such as shame or guilt.
If the way we evaluate ourselves leads us to feel shame, and we
consequently change our behavior, we are allowing our growing and
learning to be guided by self-hatred. Shame is a form of self-hatred, and
actions taken in reaction to shame are not free and joyful acts. Even if
our intention is to behave with more kindness and sensitivity, if people
sense shame or guilt behind our actions, they are less likely to appreciate
what we do than if we are motivated purely by the human desire to
contribute to life.
Avoid shoulding yourself!

=== PAGE 146 ===
In our language there is a word with enormous power to create shame
and guilt. This violent word, which we commonly use to evaluate
ourselves, is so deeply ingrained in our consciousness that many of us
would have trouble imagining how to live without it. It is the word
should, as in “I should have known better” or “I shouldn’t have done
that.” Most of the time when we use this word with ourselves, we resist
learning, because should implies that there is no choice. Human beings,
when hearing any kind of demand, tend to resist because it threatens our
autonomy—our strong need for choice. We have this reaction to tyranny
even when it’s internal tyranny in the form of a should.
A similar expression of internal demand occurs in the following self-
evaluation: “What I’m doing is just terrible. I really must do something
about it!” Think for a moment of all the people you’ve heard say, “I
really should give up smoking,” or, “I really have to do something about
exercising more.” They keep saying what they “must” do and they keep
resisting doing it, because human beings were not meant to be slaves.
We were not meant to succumb to the dictates of should and have to,
whether they come from outside or inside of ourselves. And if we do
yield and submit to these demands, our actions arise from an energy that
is devoid of life-giving joy.
Translating Self-Judgments and Inner Demands
When we communicate with ourselves on a regular basis through inner
judgment, blame, and demand, it’s not surprising that our self-concept
gives in to feeling more like a chair than a human being. A basic premise
of NVC is that whenever we imply that someone is wrong or bad, what
we are really saying is that he or she is not acting in harmony with our
needs. If the person we are judging happens to be ourselves, what we are
saying is, “I myself am not behaving in harmony with my own needs.” I
am convinced that if we learn to evaluate ourselves in terms of whether
and how well our needs are being fulfilled, we are much more likely to
learn from the evaluation.
Our challenge then, when we are doing something that is not
enriching life, is to evaluate ourselves moment by moment in a way that
inspires change both (1) in the direction of where we would like to go,

=== PAGE 147 ===
and (2) out of respect and compassion for ourselves, rather than out of
self-hatred, guilt or shame.
Self-judgments, like all judgments, are tragic expressions of unmet
needs.
NVC Mourning
After a lifetime of schooling and socialization, it is probably too late for
most of us to train our minds to think purely in terms of what we need
and value from moment to moment. However, just as we have learned to
translate judgments when conversing with others, we can train ourselves
to recognize judgmental self-talk and to immediately focus our attention
on the underlying needs.
For example, if we find ourselves reacting reproachfully to something
we did (“Look, you just messed up again!”), we can quickly stop and ask
ourselves, “What unmet need of mine is being expressed through this
moralistic judgment?” When we do connect to the need—and there may
be several layers of needs—we will notice a remarkable shift in our
bodies. Instead of the shame, guilt, or depression we likely feel when
criticizing ourselves for having
“messed up again,” we will experience any number of other feelings.
Whether it’s sadness, frustration, disappointment, fear, grief, or some
other feeling, we have been endowed by nature with these feelings for a
purpose: they mobilize us to pursue and fulfill what we need or value.
The impact of these feelings on our spirit and bodies is substantially
different from the disconnection that is brought on by guilt, shame, and
depression.
NVC mourning: connecting with the feelings and unmet needs
stimulated by past actions we now regret.
Mourning in NVC is the process of fully connecting with the unmet
needs and the feelings that are generated when we have been less than
perfect. It is an experience of regret, but regret that helps us learn from
what we have done without blaming or hating ourselves. We see how

=== PAGE 148 ===
our behavior ran counter to our own needs and values, and we open
ourselves to feelings that arise out of that awareness. When our
consciousness is focused on what we need, we are naturally stimulated
toward creative possibilities for how to get that need met. In contrast,
the moralistic judgments we use when blaming ourselves tend to obscure
such possibilities and to perpetuate a state of self-punishment.
Self-Forgiveness
We follow up on the process of mourning with self-forgiveness. Turning
our attention to the part of the self which chose to act in the way that
led to the present situation, we ask ourselves, “When I behaved in the
way which I now regret, what need of mine was I trying to meet?” I
believe that human beings are always acting in the service of needs and
values. This is true whether the action does or does not meet the need,
or whether it’s one we end up celebrating or regretting.
When we listen empathically to ourselves, we will be able to hear the
underlying need. Self-forgiveness occurs the moment this empathic
connection is made. Then we are able to recognize how our choice was
an attempt to serve life, even as the mourning process teaches us how it
fell short of fulfilling our needs.
NVC self-forgiveness: connecting with the need we were trying to
meet when we took the action that we now regret.
An important aspect of self-compassion is to be able to empathically
hold both parts of ourselves—the self that regrets a past action and the
self that took the action in the first place. The process of mourning and
self-forgiveness frees us in the direction of learning and growing. In
connecting moment by moment to our needs, we increase our creative
capacity to act in harmony with them.
The Lesson of the Polka-Dotted Suit
I would like to illustrate the process of mourning and self-forgiveness by
recalling a personal event. The day before an important workshop, I had
bought a light gray summer suit to wear. At the end of the well-attended

=== PAGE 149 ===
workshop, I was swarmed by participants asking for my signature,
address, and other information. With time closing in on another
appointment, I hastened to attend to the requests of the participants,
signing and scribbling on the many bits of paper thrust in front of me. As
I rushed out the door, I stuck my pen—uncapped—in the pocket of my
new suit. Once outside, I discovered to my horror that instead of the nice
light gray suit, I now had a polka-dotted suit!
For twenty minutes I was brutal with myself: “How could you be so
careless? What a stupid thing to do!” I had just ruined a brand-new suit:
if ever I needed compassion and understanding, this was the time, yet
there I was responding to myself in a way that left me feeling worse than
ever.
Fortunately—after only twenty minutes—I noticed what I was doing. I
stopped, looked for the need of mine that was unmet by having left the
pen uncapped, and asked myself, “What need lies behind my judging
myself as ‘careless’ and ‘stupid?’”
Immediately I saw that it was to take better care of myself: to have
given more attention to my own needs while I was rushing to address
everyone else’s needs. As soon as I touched that part of myself and
connected to the deep longing to be more aware and caring of my own
needs, my feelings shifted. There was a release of tension in my body as
the anger, shame, and guilt I was harboring toward myself dissipated. I
fully mourned the ruined suit and uncapped pen as I opened to feelings
of sadness arising along with the yearning to take better care of myself.
We are compassionate with ourselves when we are able to embrace all
parts of ourselves and recognize the needs and values expressed by
each part.
Next I shifted my attention to the need I was meeting when I slipped
the uncapped pen into my pocket. I recognized how much I valued care
and consideration for other people’s needs. Of course, in taking such
good care of other people’s needs, I had not taken the time to do the
same for myself. But instead of blame, I felt a wave of compassion for
myself as I realized that even my rushing and putting the pen away
unthinkingly had come out of serving my own need to respond to others

=== PAGE 150 ===
in a caring way!
In that compassionate place, I am able to hold both needs: in one
hand, to respond in a caring way to others’ needs, and in the other, to be
aware of and take better care of my own needs. On becoming conscious
of both needs, I can imagine ways of behaving differently in similar
situations and arriving at solutions more resourcefully than if I lose that
consciousness in a sea of self-judgment.
Don’t Do Anything That Isn’t Play!
In addition to the process of mourning and self-forgiveness, another
aspect of self-compassion I emphasize is in the energy that’s behind
whatever action we take. When I advise, “Don’t do anything that isn’t
play!” some take me to be radical, even insane. I earnestly believe,
however, that an important form of self-compassion is to make choices
motivated purely by our desire to contribute to life rather than out of
fear, guilt, shame, duty, or obligation. When we are conscious of the life-
enriching purpose behind an action we take, when the sole energy that
motivates us is simply to make life wonderful for others and ourselves,
then even hard work has an element of play in it. Correspondingly, an
otherwise joyful activity performed out of obligation, duty, fear, guilt, or
shame will lose its joy and eventually engender resistance.
We want to take action out of the desire to contribute to life rather
than out of fear, guilt, shame, or obligation.
In Chapter 2, we considered replacing language that implies lack of
choice with language that acknowledges choice. Many years ago I began
to engage in an activity which significantly enlarged the pool of joy and
happiness available to my life, while diminishing depression, guilt, and
shame. I offer it here as a possible way to deepen our compassion for
ourselves, to help us live our lives out of joyous play by staying
grounded in a clear awareness of the life-enriching need behind
everything we do.
Translating Have to to Choose to

=== PAGE 151 ===
Step 1
What do you do in your life that you don’t experience as playful? List
on a piece of paper all those things that you tell yourself you have to do.
List any activity you dread but do anyway because you perceive yourself
to have no choice.
When I first reviewed my own list, just seeing how long it was gave
me insight as to why so much of my time was spent not enjoying life. I
noticed how many ordinary, daily things I was doing by tricking myself
into believing that I had to do them.
The first item on my list was “write clinical reports.” I hated writing
these reports, yet I was spending at least an hour of agony over them
every day. My second item was “drive the children’s car pool to school.”
Step 2
After completing your list, clearly acknowledge to yourself that you
are doing these things because you choose to do them, not because you
have to. Insert the words “I choose to. .. “ in front of each item you listed.
I recall my own resistance to this step. “Writing clinical reports,” I
insisted to myself, “is not something I choose to do! I have to do it. I’m a
clinical psychologist. I have to write these reports.”
Step 3
After having acknowledged that you choose to do a particular activity,
get in touch with the intention behind your choice by completing the
statement, I choose to … because I want ….
At first I fumbled to identify what I wanted from writing clinical
reports. I had already determined, several months earlier, that the
reports did not serve my clients enough to justify the time they were
taking, so why was I continuing to invest so much energy in their
preparation? Finally I realized that I was choosing to write the reports
solely because I wanted the income they provided. As soon as I
recognized this, I never wrote another clinical report. I can’t tell you
how joyful I feel just thinking of how many clinical reports I haven’t
written since that moment thirty-five years ago! When I realized that
money was my primary motivation, I immediately saw that I could find
other ways to take care of myself financially, and that in fact, I’d rather

=== PAGE 152 ===
scavenge in garbage cans for food than write another clinical report.
With every choice you make, be conscious of what need it serves.
The next item on my list of unjoyful tasks was driving the children to
school. When I examined the reason behind that chore, however, I felt
appreciation for the benefits my children received from attending their
school. They could easily walk to the neighborhood school, but their
own school was far more in harmony with my educational values. I
continued to drive, but with a different energy; instead of “Oh, darn, I
have to drive the car pool today,” I was conscious of my purpose, which
was for my children to have a quality of education that was very dear to
me. Of course I sometimes needed to remind myself two or three times
during the drive to refocus my mind on what purpose my action was
serving.
Cultivating Awareness of the Energy Behind Our Actions
As you explore the statement, “I choose to … because I want …,” you
may discover—as I did with the children’s car pool—the important
values behind the choices you’ve made. I am convinced that after we
gain clarity regarding the need being served by our actions, we can
experience those actions as play even when they involve hard work,
challenge, or frustration.
For some items on your list, however, you might uncover one or
several of the following motivations:
(1)FOR MONEY
Money is a major form of extrinsic reward in our society. Choices
prompted by a desire for reward are costly: they deprive us of the joy in
life that comes with actions grounded in the clear intention to contribute
to a human need. Money is not a “need” as we define it in NVC; it is one
of countless strategies that may be selected to address a need.
(2)FOR APPROVAL
Like money, approval from others is a form of extrinsic reward. Our
culture has educated us to hunger for reward. We attended schools that
used extrinsic means to motivate us to study; we grew up in homes

=== PAGE 153 ===
where we were rewarded for being good little boys and girls, and were
punished when our caretakers judged us to be otherwise. Thus, as adults,
we easily trick ourselves into believing that life consists of doing things
for reward; we are addicted to getting a smile, a pat on the back, and
people’s verbal judgments that we are a “good person,” “good parent,”
“good citizen,” “good worker,” “good friend,” and so forth. We do things
to get people to like us and avoid things that may lead people to dislike
or punish us.
I find it tragic that we work so hard to buy love and assume that we
must deny ourselves and do for others in order to be liked. In fact, when
we do things solely in the spirit of enhancing life, we will find others
appreciating us. Their appreciation, however, is only a feedback
mechanism confirming that our efforts had the
intended effect. The recognition that we have chosen to use our power
to serve life and have done so successfully brings us the genuine joy of
celebrating ourselves in a way that approval from others can never offer.
(3)TO ESCAPE PUNISHMENT
Some of us pay income tax primarily to avoid punishment. As a
consequence, we are likely to approach that yearly ritual with a degree
of resentment. I recall, however, from my childhood how differently my
father and grandfather felt about paying taxes. They had immigrated to
the United States from Russia and were desirous of supporting a
government they believed was protecting people in a way that the czar
had not. Imagining the many people whose welfare was being served by
their tax money, they felt earnest pleasure as they sent their checks to
the U.S. government.
(4)TO AVOID SHAME
There may be some tasks we choose to do just to avoid shame. We
know that if we don’t do them, we’ll end up suffering severe self-
judgment, hearing our own voice telling us there is something wrong or
stupid about us. If we do something stimulated solely by the urge to
avoid shame, we will generally end up detesting it.
(5)TO AVOID GUILT
In other instances, we may think, “If I don’t do this, people will be
disappointed in me.” We are afraid we’ll end up feeling guilty for failing

=== PAGE 154 ===
to fulfill other people’s expectations of us. There is a world of difference
between doing something for others in order to avoid guilt and doing it
out of a clear awareness of our own need to contribute to the happiness
of other human beings. The first is a world filled with misery; the second
is a world filled with play.
Be conscious of actions motivated by the desire for money or
approval, and by fear, shame, or guilt. Know the price you pay for
them.
(6)TO SATISFY A SENSE OF DUTY
When we use language which denies choice (for example, words such
as should, have to, ought, must, can’t, supposed to, etc.), our behaviors arise
out of a vague sense of guilt, duty, or obligation. I consider this to be the
most socially dangerous and personally unfortunate of all the ways we
act when we’re cut off from our needs. In Chapter 2 we saw how the
concept of Amtssprache allowed Adolf Eichmann and his colleagues to
send tens of thousands of people to their deaths without feeling
emotionally affected or personally responsible. When we speak a
language that denies choice, we forfeit the life in ourselves for a
robotlike mentality that disconnects us from our own core.
The most dangerous of all behaviors may consist of doing things
“because we’re supposed to.”
After examining the list of items you have generated, you may decide
to stop doing certain things in the same spirit that I chose to forego
writing clinical reports. As radical as it may seem, it is possible to do
things only out of play. I believe that to the degree that we engage
moment by moment in the playfulness of enriching life—motivated
solely by the desire for enriching life—to that degree are we being
compassionate with ourselves.
Summary
The most crucial application of NVC may be in the way we treat
ourselves. When we make mistakes, instead of getting caught up in

=== PAGE 155 ===
moralistic self-judgments, we can use the process of NVC mourning and
self-forgiveness to show us where we can grow. By assessing our
behaviors in terms of our own unmet needs, the impetus for change
comes not out of shame, guilt, anger, or depression, but out of the
genuine desire to contribute to our own and others’ well-being.
We also cultivate self-compassion by consciously choosing in daily life
to act only in service to our own needs and values rather than out of
duty, for extrinsic rewards, or to avoid guilt, shame, and punishment. If
we review the joyless acts to which we currently subject ourselves and
make the translation from “have to” to “choose to,” we will discover
more play and integrity in our lives.

=== PAGE 156 ===
T
CHAPTER TEN
Expressing Anger Fully
he subject of anger gives us a unique opportunity to dive more
deeply into NVC. Because it brings many aspects of this process into
sharp focus, the expression of anger clearly demonstrates the difference
between NVC and other forms of communication.
Killing people is too superficial.
I would like to suggest that killing people is too superficial. Killing,
hitting, blaming, hurting others—whether physically or emotionally—
are all superficial expressions of what is going on within us when we are
angry. If we are truly angry, we would want a much more powerful way
to fully express ourselves.
This understanding comes as a relief to many groups I work with that
experience oppression and discrimination and want to increase their
power to effect change. Such groups are uneasy when they hear the
terms nonviolent or compassionate communication because they have so
often been urged to stifle their anger, calm down, and accept the status
quo. They worry about approaches that view their anger as an
undesirable quality needing to be purged. The process we are describing,
however, does not encourage us to ignore, squash, or swallow anger, but
rather to express the core of our anger fully and wholeheartedly.
Distinguishing Stimulus from Cause
The first step to fully expressing anger in NVC is to divorce the other
person from any responsibility for our anger. We rid ourselves of
thoughts such as, “He (or she or they) made me angry when they did
that.” Such thinking leads us to express our anger superficially by
blaming or punishing the other person. Earlier we saw that the behavior
of others may be a stimulus for our feelings, but not the cause. We are
never angry because of what someone else did. We can identify the other

=== PAGE 157 ===
person’s behavior as the stimulus, but it is important to establish a clear
separation between stimulus and cause.
We are never angry because of what others say or do.
I’d like to illustrate this distinction with an example from my work at
a Swedish prison. My job was to show prisoners who had behaved in
violent ways how to fully express their anger rather than to kill, beat, or
rape other people. During an exercise calling on participants to identify
the stimulus of their anger, one prisoner wrote: “Three weeks ago I made
a request to the prison officials and they still haven’t responded to it.”
His statement was a clear observation of a stimulus, describing what
other people had done. I then asked him to state the cause of his anger:
“When this happened, you felt angry because what?”
“I just told you,” he exclaimed. “I felt angry because they didn’t
respond to my request!” By equating stimulus and cause, he had tricked
himself into thinking that it was the behavior of the prison officials that
was making him angry. This is an easy habit to acquire in a culture that
uses guilt as a means of controlling people. In such cultures, it becomes
important to trick people into thinking that we can make others feel a
certain way.
Where guilt is a tactic of manipulation and coercion, it is useful to
confuse stimulus and cause. As mentioned earlier, children who hear, “It
hurts Mommy and Daddy when you get poor grades,” are led to believe
that their behavior is the cause of their parents’ pain. The same dynamic
is observed among intimate partners: “It really disappoints me when
you’re not here for my birthday.” The English language facilitates the
use of this guilt-inducing tactic.
To motivate by guilt, mix up stimulus and cause.
We say: “You make me angry.” “You hurt me by doing that.” “I feel
sad because you did that.” We use our language in many different ways
to trick ourselves into believing that our feelings result from what others
do. The first step in the process of fully expressing our anger is to realize
that what other people do is never the cause of how we feel.
The cause of anger lies in our thinking—in thoughts of blame and

=== PAGE 158 ===
judgment.
So what is the cause of anger? In Chapter 5, we discussed the four
options we have when confronted with a message or behavior that we
don’t like. Anger is generated when we choose the second option:
whenever we are angry, we are finding fault—we are choosing to play
God by judging or blaming the other person for being wrong or
deserving punishment. I would like to suggest that this is the cause of
anger. Even if we are not initially conscious of it, the cause of anger is
located in our own thinking.
The third option described in Chapter 5 is to shine the light of
consciousness on our own feelings and needs. Rather than going up to
our head to make a mental analysis of wrongness regarding somebody,
we choose to connect to the life that is within us. This life energy is most
palpable and accessible when we focus on what we need in each
moment.
For example, if someone arrives late for an appointment and we need
reassurance that she cares about us, we may feel hurt. If, instead, our
need is to spend time purposefully and constructively, we may feel
frustrated. But if our need is for thirty minutes of quiet solitude, we may
be grateful for her tardiness and feel pleased. Thus, it is not the behavior
of the other person but our own need that causes our feeling. When we
are connected to our need, whether it is for reassurance, purposefulness,
or solitude, we are in touch with our life energy. We may have strong
feelings, but we are never angry. Anger is a result of life-alienating
thinking that is disconnected from needs. It indicates that we have
moved up to our head to analyze and judge somebody rather than focus
on which of our needs are not getting met.
In addition to the third option of focusing on our own needs and
feelings, the choice is ours at any moment to shine the light of
consciousness on the other person’s feelings and needs. When we choose
this fourth option, we also never feel anger. We are not repressing the
anger; we see how anger is simply absent in each moment that we are
fully present with the other person’s feelings and needs.
All Anger Has a Life-Serving Core

=== PAGE 159 ===
“But,” I am asked, “aren’t there circumstances in which anger is
justified? Isn’t ‘righteous indignation’ called for in the face of careless,
thoughtless pollution of the environment, for example?” My answer is
that I strongly believe that to whatever degree I support the
consciousness that there is such a thing as a “careless action” or a
“conscientious action,” a “greedy person” or a “moral person,” I am
contributing to violence on this planet. Rather than agreeing or
disagreeing about what people are for murdering, raping, or polluting
the environment, I believe we serve life better by focusing attention on
what we are needing.
When we judge others, we contribute to violence.
I see all anger as a result of life-alienating, violence-provoking
thinking. At the core of all anger is a need that is not being fulfilled.
Thus anger can be valuable if we use it as an alarm clock to wake us up
—to realize we have a need that isn’t being met and that we are thinking
in a way that makes it unlikely to be met. To fully express anger requires
full consciousness of our need. In addition, energy is required to get the
need met. Anger, however, co-opts our energy by directing it toward
punishing people rather than meeting our needs. Instead of engaging in
“righteous indignation,” I recommend connecting empathically with our
own needs or those of others. This may take extensive practice, whereby
over and over again, we consciously replace the phrase “I am angry
because they … “ with “I am angry because I am needing … “
I once was taught a remarkable lesson while working with students in
a correctional school for children in Wisconsin. On two
Anger co-opts our energy by diverting it toward punitive actions.
successive days I was hit on the nose in remarkably similar ways. The
first time, I received a sharp blow across the nose from an elbow while
interceding in a fight between two students. I was so enraged it was all I
could do to keep myself from hitting back. (On the streets of Detroit
where I grew up, it took far less than an elbow in the nose to provoke
me to rage.) The second day: similar situation, same nose—and thus
more physical pain—but not a bit of anger!
Use anger as a wake-up call.

=== PAGE 160 ===
Reflecting deeply that evening on this experience, I recognized how I
had labeled the first child in my mind as a “spoiled brat.” That image
was in my head before his elbow ever caught my nose, and when it did,
it was no longer simply an elbow hitting my nose. It was: “That
obnoxious brat has no right to do this!” I had another judgment about
the second child; I saw him as a “pathetic creature.” Since I had a
tendency to worry about this child, even though my nose was hurting
and bleeding much more severely, the second day I felt no rage at all. I
could not have received a more powerful lesson to help me see that it’s
not what the other person does, but the images and interpretations in my
own head that produce my anger.
Stimulus versus Cause: Practical Implications
I emphasize the distinction between cause and stimulus on practical and
tactical as well as on philosophical grounds. I’d like to illustrate this
point by returning to my dialogue with John, the Swedish prisoner:
John: Three weeks ago I made a request to the prison officials and they still haven’t responded
to my request.
MBR: So when this happened, you felt angry because what?
John: I just told you. They didn’t respond to my request!
MBR: Hold it. Instead of saying, “I felt angry because they …,” stop and become conscious of
what you’re telling yourself that’s making you so angry.
John: I’m not telling myself anything.
MBR: Stop, slow down, just listen to what’s going on inside.
John: (after silently reflecting) I’m telling myself that they have no respect for human beings;
they are a bunch of cold, faceless bureaucrats who don’t give a damn about anybody
but themselves! They’re a real bunch of …
MBR: Thanks, that’s enough. Now you know why you’re angry—it’s that kind of thinking.
John: But what’s wrong with thinking that way?
MBR: I’m not saying there is anything wrong with thinking that way. Notice if I say there is
something wrong with you for thinking that way, I’d be thinking the same way
about you. I don’t say it’s wrong to judge people, to call them faceless bureaucrats or
to label their actions inconsiderate or selfish. However, it’s that kind of thinking on

=== PAGE 161 ===
your part that makes you feel very angry. Focus your attention on your needs: what
are your needs in this situation?
John: (after a long silence) Marshall, I need the training I was requesting. If I don’t get that
training, as sure as I’m sitting here, I’m gonna end up back in this prison when I get
out.
MBR: Now that your attention is on your needs, how do you feel?
John: Scared.
When we become aware of our needs, anger gives way to life-serving
feelings.
MBR: Now put yourself in the shoes of a prison official. If I’m an inmate, am I more likely to
get my needs met if I come to you saying, “Hey, I really need that training and I’m
scared of what’s going to happen if I don’t get it,” or if I approach while seeing you
as a faceless bureaucrat? Even if I don’t say those words out loud, my eyes will
reveal that kind of thinking. Which way am I more likely to get my needs met?
(John stares at the floor and remains silent.)
MBR: Hey, buddy, what’s going on?
John: Can’t talk about it.
Violence comes from the belief that other people cause our pain and
therefore deserve punishment.
Three hours later, John approached me and said, “Marshall, I wish
you had taught me two years ago what you taught me this morning. I
wouldn’t have had to kill my best friend.”
All violence is the result of people tricking themselves, as did this
young
man, into believing that their pain derives from other people and that
consequently those people deserve to be punished.
We recall four options when hearing a difficult message:
1.Blame ourselves
2.Blame others
3.Sense our own feelings and needs

=== PAGE 162 ===
4.Sense others’ feelings and needs
One time I saw my younger son take a fifty-cent piece from his sister’s
room. I said, “Brett, did you ask your sister whether you could have
that?” “I didn’t take it from her,” he answered. Now I faced my four
options. I could have called him a liar, which would, however, have
worked against my getting my needs met since any judgment of another
person diminishes the likelihood of our needs being met. Where I
focused my attention at that moment was critical. If I were to judge him
a liar, it would point me in one direction. If I were to think that he didn’t
respect me enough to tell me the truth, I would be pointed in another
direction. If, however, I were either to empathize with him at that
moment, or express nakedly what I was feeling and needing, I would
greatly increase the possibility of getting my needs met.
The way I expressed my choice—which in this situation turned out to
be helpful—was not so much through what I said, but through what I
did. Instead of judging him as lying, I tried to hear his feeling: he was
scared, and his need was to protect himself from being punished. By
empathizing with him, I had a chance of making an emotional
connection out of which we could both get our needs met. However, if I
had approached him with the view that he was lying—even if I hadn’t
expressed it out loud—he would have been less likely to feel safe
expressing truthfully what had happened. I would have then become
part of the process: by the very act of judging another person as a liar, I
would contribute to a self-fulfilling prophecy. Why would people want to
tell the truth, knowing they will be judged and punished for doing so?
Judgments of others contribute to self-fulfilling prophecies.
I would like to suggest that when our heads are filled with judgments
and analyses that others are bad, greedy, irresponsible, lying, cheating,
polluting the environment, valuing profit more than life, or behaving in
other ways they shouldn’t, very few of them will be interested in our
needs. If we want to protect the environment, and we go to a corporate
executive with the attitude, “You know, you are really a killer of the
planet, you have no right to abuse the land in this way,” we have
severely impaired our chances of getting our needs met. It is a rare
human being who can maintain focus on our needs when we are

=== PAGE 163 ===
expressing them through images of their wrongness. Of course, we may
be successful in using such judgments to intimidate people into meeting
our needs. If they feel so frightened, guilty, or ashamed that they change
their behavior, we may come to believe that it is possible to “win” by
telling people what’s wrong with them.
With a broader perspective, however, we realize that each time our
needs are met in this way, we not only lose, but we have contributed
very tangibly to violence on the planet. We may have solved an
immediate problem, but we will have created another one. The more
people hear blame and judgment, the more defensive and aggressive
they become and the less they will care about our needs in the future. So
even if our present need is met in the sense that people do what we
want, we will pay for it later.
Four Steps to Expressing Anger
Let’s look at what the process of fully expressing our anger actually
requires in concrete form. The first step is to stop and do nothing except
to breathe. We refrain from making any move to blame or punish the
other person. We simply stay quiet. Then we identify the thoughts that
are making us angry. For example, we overhear a statement that leads us
to believe that we’ve been excluded from a conversation because of race.
We sense anger, stop, and recognize the thoughts stirring in our head:
“It’s unfair to act like that. She’s being racist.” We know that all
judgments like these are tragic expressions of unmet needs, so we take
the next step and connect to the needs behind those thoughts. If we
judge someone to be racist, the need may be for inclusion, equality,
respect, or connection.
Steps to expressing anger:
1.Stop. Breathe.
2.Identify our judgmental thoughts.
3.Connect with our needs.
4.Express our feelings and unmet needs.

=== PAGE 164 ===
To fully express ourselves, we now open our mouth and speak the
anger—but the anger has been transformed into needs and need-
connected feelings. To articulate these feelings may require a lot of
courage. For me it’s easy to get angry and tell people, “That was a racist
thing to do!” In fact, I may even enjoy saying such things, but to get
down to the deeper feelings and needs behind such a statement may be
very frightening. To fully express our anger, we may say to the other
person, “When you entered the room and started talking to the others
and didn’t say anything to me, and then made the comment about white
people, I felt really sick to my stomach, and got so scared; it triggered off
all kinds of needs on my part to be treated equally. I’d like you to tell me
how you feel when I tell you this.”
Offering Empathy First
In most cases, however, another step needs to take place before we can
expect the other party to connect with what is going on in us. Because it
will often be difficult for others to receive our feelings and needs in such
situations, if we want them to hear us we would need first to empathize
with them. The more we empathize with what leads them to behave in
the ways that are not meeting our needs, the more likely it is that they
will be able to reciprocate afterwards.
Over the last thirty years I’ve had a wealth of experience speaking
NVC with people who harbor strong beliefs about specific races and
ethnic groups. Early one morning I was picked up by a cab at an airport
to take me into town.
The more we hear them, the more they’ll hear us.
A message from the dispatcher came over the loudspeaker for the
cabbie: “Pick up Mr. Fishman at the synagogue on Main Street.”
The man next to me in the cab muttered, “These kikes get up early in
the morning so they can screw everybody out of their money.”
For twenty seconds, there was smoke coming out of my ears.
In earlier years, my first reaction would have been to want to
physically hurt such a person. Instead I took a few deep breaths and then

=== PAGE 165 ===
gave myself some empathy for the hurt, fear, and rage that were stirring
inside me. I attended to my feelings. I stayed conscious that my anger
wasn’t coming from my fellow passenger nor the statement he had just
made. His comment had triggered off a volcano inside of me, but I knew
that my anger and profound fear came from a far deeper source than
those words he had just uttered. I sat back and simply allowed the
violent thoughts to play themselves out. I even enjoyed the image of
actually grabbing his head and smashing it.
Giving myself this empathy enabled me to then focus my attention on
the humanness behind his message, after which the first words out of my
mouth were, “Are you feeling … ?” I tried to empathize with him, to
hear his pain. Why? Because I wanted to see the beauty in him, and I
wanted for him to fully apprehend what I had experienced when he
made his remark. I knew I wouldn’t receive that kind of understanding if
there were a storm brewing inside of him. My intention was to connect
with him and show a respectful empathy for the life energy in him that
was behind the comment.
Stay conscious of the violent thoughts that arise in our minds, without judging
them.
My experience told me that if I were able to empathize, then he would
be able to hear me in return. It would not be easy, but he would be able
to.
“Are you feeling frustrated?” I asked. “It appears that you might have
had some bad experiences with Jewish people.”
He eyed me for a moment. “Yeah! These people are disgusting. They’ll
do anything for money.”
“You feel distrust and the need to protect yourself when you’re
involved in financial affairs with them?”
When we hear another person’s feelings and needs, we recognize our
common humanity.
“That’s right!” he exclaimed, continuing to release more judgments, as
I listened for the feeling and need behind each one. When we settle our
attention on other people’s feelings and needs, we experience our

=== PAGE 166 ===
common humanity. When I hear that he’s scared and wants to protect
himself, I recognize how I also have a need to protect myself and I too
know what it’s like to be scared. When my consciousness is focused on
another human being’s feelings and needs, I see the universality of our
experience. I had a major conflict with what went on in his head, but
I’ve learned that I enjoy human beings more if I don’t hear what they
think. Especially with folks who have his kind of thoughts. I’ve learned
to savor life much more by only hearing what’s going on in their hearts
and not getting caught up with the stuff in their heads.
This man kept on pouring out his sadness and frustration. Before I
knew it, he’d finished with Jews and moved on to blacks. He was
charged with pain around a number of subjects. After nearly ten minutes
of my just listening, he stopped: he had felt understood.
Then I let him know what was going on in me:
MBR: You know, when you first started to talk, I felt a lot of anger, a lot of frustration, sadness,
and discouragement, because I’ve had very different experiences with Jews than
you’ve had, and I was wanting you to have much more the kind of experiences I’ve
had. Can you tell me what you heard me say?
Man: Oh, I’m not saying they’re all …
MBR: Excuse me, hold on, hold it. Can you tell me what you heard me say?
Our need is for the other person to truly hear our pain.
Man: What are you talking about?
MBR: Let me repeat what I’m trying to say. I really want you to just hear the pain I felt when I
heard your words. It’s really important to me that you hear that. I was saying I felt a
real sense of sadness because my experiences with Jewish people have been very
different. I was just wishing that you had had some experiences that were different
from the ones you were describing. Can you tell me what you heard me say?
Man: You’re saying I have no right to talk the way I did.
MBR: No, I would like you to hear me differently. I really don’t want to blame you. I have no
desire to blame you. I intended to slow down the conversation, because in my
experience, to whatever degree people hear blame, they have failed to hear our pain.
If this man said, “Those were terrible things for me to say; those were racist remarks
made,” he would not have heard my pain.

=== PAGE 167 ===
I People do not hear our pain when they believe they are at fault.
As soon as people think that they have done something wrong, they
will not be fully apprehending our pain.
I didn’t want him to hear blame, because I wanted him to know what
had gone on in my heart when he uttered his remark.
Blaming is easy. People are used to hearing blame; sometimes they
agree with it and hate themselves—which doesn’t stop them from
behaving the same way—and sometimes they hate us for calling them
racists or whatever—which also doesn’t stop their behavior. If we sense
blame entering their mind, as I did in the cab, we may need to slow
down, go back, and hear their pain for a while more.
Taking Our Time
Probably the most important part of learning how to live the process we
have been discussing is to take our time. We may feel awkward
deviating from the habitual behaviors that our conditioning has
rendered automatic, but if our intention is to consciously live life in
harmony with our values, then we’ll want to take our time.
A friend of mine, Sam Williams, jotted down the basic components of
the NVC process on a three-by-five card, which he would use as a cheat
sheet at work. When his boss would confront him, Sam would stop, refer
to the card in his hand, and take time to remember how to respond.
When I asked whether his colleagues were finding him a little strange,
constantly staring into his hand and taking so much time to form his
sentences, Sam replied, “It doesn’t actually take that much more time,
but even if it did, it’s still worth it to me. It’s important for me to know
that I am responding to people the way I really want to.” At home he
was more overt, explaining to his wife and children why he was taking
the time and trouble to consult the card. Whenever there was an
argument in the family, he would pull out the card and take his time.
After about a month, he felt comfortable enough to put it away. Then
one evening, he and Scottie, age four, were having a conflict over
television and it wasn’t going well. “Daddy,” Scottie said urgently, “get
the card!”

=== PAGE 168 ===
Practice translating each judgment into an unmet need.
For those of you wishing to apply NVC, especially in challenging
situations of anger, I would suggest the following exercise. As we have
seen, our anger comes from judgments, labels, and thoughts of blame, of
what people “should” do and what they “deserve.” List the judgments
that float most frequently in your head by using the cue, “I don’t like
people who are … “ Collect all such negative judgments in your head
and then ask yourself, “When I make that judgment of a person, what
am I needing and not getting?” In this way, you train yourself to frame
your thinking in terms of unmet needs rather than in terms of judgments
of other people.
Take your time.
Practice is essential, because most of us were raised, if not on the
streets of Detroit, then somewhere only slightly less violent. Judging and
blaming have become second nature to us. To practice NVC, we need to
proceed slowly, think carefully before we speak, and often just take a
deep breath and not speak at all. Learning the process and applying it
both take time.
Summary
Blaming and punishing others are superficial expressions of anger. If we
wish to fully express anger, the first step is to divorce the other person
from any responsibility for our anger. Instead we shine the light of
consciousness on our own feelings and needs. By expressing our needs,
we are far more likely to get them met than by judging, blaming, or
punishing others.
The four steps to expressing anger are (1) stop and breathe, (2)
identify our judgmental thoughts, (3) connect with our needs, and (4)
express our feelings and unmet needs. Sometimes, in between steps 3
and 4, we may choose to empathize with the other person so that he or
she will be better able to hear us when we express ourselves in step 4.
We need to take our time both in learning and in applying the process
of NVC.

=== PAGE 169 ===
NVC in Action
Parent and Teen Dialogue: A Life-Threatening Issue In this situation, fifteen-year-
old Bill took a car, without permission, from Jorge, a family friend. He went on a
joy ride with two friends and returned the car undamaged to the garage, where its
absence had not been detected. Since then, however, Jorge’s fourteen-year-old
daughter, Eva, who had gone along for the ride, told her father what had happened.
Jorge informed Bill’s father, who is now approaching his son. The father has just
recently been practicing NVC.
Father: So I hear you, Eva, and Dave took Jorge’s car without asking.
Bill: No, we didn’t!
Father: (in a loud voice) Don’t lie to me; it’ll only make it worse!
Then he remembered to first connect to his own feelings and needs in order to stay
in connection with his son.
Father: You just sit there for a moment; I need to think.
Going inside himself, he saw how angry and scared he was. Angry when telling
himself, “Bill should have known better!” and “What a liar he’s become!” Scared
when he thinks of all the potential consequences of not only Bill’s action, but his
own misjudgment of what his son might do.
Father: (silently to himself) That was stupid of me to assume he knows better. Someone
could have gotten killed in this! (then catching himself) Oops, I need to
translate the labels “stupid” and “liar” into feelings and needs. For “stupid,”
I guess the feeling is disappointment in myself: I would have liked to think
that I knew him better. And as for “liar,” I’m feeling pretty scared because I
want to be able to count on getting accurate information to deal with this
situation.
Father: (out loud, after silence while he mulls over how to begin talking) Bill, are you
worried that you’d be punished if you gave me accurate information?
Bill: Yeah, you’re always so mean whenever I do anything you don’t like.
Father: Are you saying you’d like more understanding and fairer treatment for
what you do?
Bill: Oh, sure, like I’m really gonna get fair treatment and understanding from
you!

=== PAGE 170 ===
Father: (silently to himself) Boy, do I get angry when he says that! Can’t he see how
hard I’m trying? I really need a little respect for how hard this is, and I
guess also a little caring for how scared I’m feeling.
Father: (out loud to Bill) Sounds to me like you’re worried that no matter what
you say, you won’t be treated fairly?
Bill: What do you care about treating me fairly? When something happens, you
just want someone to punish. Besides, what’s the big deal? Even if we
did take the car, no one got hurt and it’s back where it was. I mean,
this is no major crime wave.
Father: Are you scared there’ll be harsh consequences if you admit to taking the
car, and you want to trust that you’ll be treated justly?
Bill: Yeah.
Father: (allowing time for silence and the connection to go deeper) What could I do to
give you that reassurance?
Bill: Promise to never punish me again.
Father: (Aware that punishment will not help Bill develop consciousness around
potential consequences of his behavior, but will only contribute to greater
disconnection and resistance, Bill’s father expresses willingness to agree to
Bill’s request.) I’d be open to that agreement if you agree to stay in
dialogue with me. That is, we talk until I’m satisfied you’re aware of all
the possible consequences of your having taken that car. However, in
the future, if it happens that I’m not confident that you see the
potential danger of what you’re in for, I might still use force—but only
in order to protect you.
Bill: Wow, great! It really feels good knowing I’m so stupid you have to use force
to protect me from myself!
Father: (losing touch with his own needs, but silently) Man, there are times when I
could just kill the little … I’m so furious when he says things like that! It
really doesn’t seem like he cares…. Damn, what am I needing here? I’m
needing to know, when I’m working this hard, that at least he cares.)
Father: (out loud, angrily) You know, Bill, when you say things like that, I get
really pissed off. I’m trying so hard to stay with you on this, and when I
hear things like that … Look, I need to know if you even want to keep
talking with me.

=== PAGE 171 ===
Bill: I don’t care.
Father: Bill, I really want to listen to you rather than fall into my old habits of
blaming and threatening you whenever something comes up that I’m
upset about. But when I hear you say things like, “It feels good to know
I’m so stupid,” in the tone of voice you just used, I find it hard to
control myself. I could use your help on this. That is, if you would
rather me listen to you than blame or threaten. Or if not, then, I
suppose my other option is to just handle this the way I’m used to
handling things.
Bill: And what would that be?
Father: Well, by now, I’d probably be saying, “Hey, you’re grounded for two
years: no TV, no car, no money, no dates, no nothing!”
Bill: Well, I guess I’d want you to do it the new way then.
Father: (with humor) I’m glad to see that your sense of self-preservation is still
intact. Now I need you to tell me whether you’re willing to share some
honesty and vulnerability.
Bill: What do you mean by “vulnerability”?
Father: It means that you tell me what you are really feeling about the things
we’re talking about, and I tell you the same from my end. (in a firm
voice)Are you willing?
Bill: Okay, I’ll try.
Father: (with sigh of relief) Thank you. I’m grateful for your willingness to try. Did
I tell you—Jorge grounded Eva for three months—she won’t be
allowed to do anything. How do you feel about that?
Bill: Oh man, what a bummer; that’s so unfair!
Father: I’d like to hear how you really feel about it.
Bill: I told you—it’s totally unfair!
Father: (realizing Bill isn’t in touch with what he’s feeling, decides to guess) Are you
sad that she’s having to pay so much for her mistake?
Bill: No, it’s not that. I mean, it wasn’t her mistake really.
Father: Oh, so are you upset she’s paying for something that was your idea to
start with?

=== PAGE 172 ===
Bill: Well, yeah, she just went along with what I told her to do.
Father: Sounds to me like you’re kind of hurting inside seeing the kind of effect
your decision had on Eva.
Bill: Sorta.
Father: Billy, I really need to know that you are able to see how your actions have
consequences.
Bill: Well, I wasn’t thinking about what could’ve gone wrong. Yeah, I guess I did
really screw up bad.
Father: I’d rather you see it as something you did that didn’t turn out the way you
wanted. And I still need reassurance about your being aware of the
consequences. Would you tell me what you’re feeling right now about
what you did?
Bill: I feel really stupid, Dad…. I didn’t mean to hurt anyone.
Father: (translating Bill’s self-judgments into feelings and needs) So you’re sad, and
regret what you did because you’d like to be trusted not to do harm?
Bill: Yeah, I didn’t mean to cause so much trouble. I just didn’t think about it.
Father: Are you saying you wish you had thought about it more and gotten
clearer before you acted?
Bill: (reflecting) Yeah …
Father: Well, it’s reassuring for me to hear that, and for there to be some real
healing with Jorge, I would like you to go to him and tell him what
you just told me. Would you be willing to do that?
Bill: Oh man, that’s so scary; he’ll be really mad!
Father: Yeah, it’s likely he will be. That’s one of the consequences. Are you
willing to be responsible for your actions? I like Jorge and I want to
keep him for a friend, and I’m guessing that you would like to keep
your connection with Eva. Is that the case?
Bill: She’s one of my best friends.
Father: So shall we go see them?
Bill: (fearfully and reluctantly) Well … okay. Yeah, I guess so.
Father: Are you scared and needing to know that you will be safe if you go there?

=== PAGE 173 ===
Bill: Yeah.
Father: We’ll go together: I’ll be there for you and with you. I’m really proud that
you are willing.

=== PAGE 174 ===
CHAPTER ELEVEN

=== PAGE 175 ===
W
The Protective Use of Force
When the Use of Force Is Unavoidable
hen two disputing parties have each had an opportunity to fully
express what they are observing, feeling, needing, and requesting—
and each has empathized with the other—a resolution can usually be
reached that meets the needs of both sides. At the very least, the two can
agree, in goodwill, to disagree.
In some situations, however, the opportunity for such dialogue may
not exist, and the use of force may be necessary to protect life or
individual rights. For instance, the other party may be unwilling to
communicate, 
or 
imminent 
danger 
may 
not 
allow 
time 
for
communication. In these situations, we may need to resort to force. If we
do, NVC requires us to differentiate between the protective and the
punitive uses of force.
The Thinking Behind the Use of Force
The intention behind the protective use of force is to prevent injury or
injustice. The intention behind the punitive use of force is to cause
individuals to suffer for their perceived misdeeds. When we grab a child
who is running into the street to prevent the child from being injured,
we are applying protective force. The punitive use of force, on the other
hand, might involve physical or psychological attack, such as spanking
the child or saying, “How could you be so stupid! You should be
ashamed of yourself!”
The intention behind the protective use of force is only to protect, not
to punish, blame, or condemn.
When we exercise the protective use of force, we are focusing on the
life or rights we want to protect, without passing judgment on either the
person or the behavior. We are not blaming or condemning the child
who rushes into the street; our thinking is solely directed toward
protecting the child from danger. (For application of this kind of force in

=== PAGE 176 ===
social and political conflicts, see Robert Irwin’s book, Building a Peace
System.) The assumption behind the protective use of force is that
people behave in ways injurious to themselves and others due to some
form of ignorance. The corrective process is therefore one of education,
not punishment. Ignorance includes (1) a lack of awareness of the
consequences of our actions, (2) an inability to see how our needs may
be met without injury to others, (3) the belief that we have the right to
punish or hurt others because they “deserve” it, and (4) delusional
thinking that involves, for example, hearing a voice that instructs us to
kill someone.
Punitive action, on the other hand, is based on the assumption that
people commit offenses because they are bad or evil, and to correct the
situation, they need to be made to repent. Their “correction” is
undertaken through punitive action designed to make them (1) suffer
enough to see the error of their ways, (2) repent, and (3) change. In
practice, however, punitive action, rather than evoking repentance and
learning, is just as likely to generate resentment and hostility and to
reinforce resistance to the very behavior we are seeking.
Types of Punitive Force
Physical punishment, such as spanking, is one punitive use of force. I
have found the subject of corporal punishment to provoke strong
sentiments among parents. Some adamantly defend the practice,
referring to the Bible: “Spare the rod, spoil the child. It’s because parents
don’t spank that delinquency is now rampant.” They are persuaded that
spanking our children shows that we love them by setting clear
boundaries. Other parents are equally insistent that spanking is unloving
and ineffective because it teaches children that, when all else fails, we
can always resort to physical violence.
Fear of corporal punishment obscures children’s awareness of the
compassion underlying their parents’ demands.
My personal concern is that children’s fear of corporal punishment
may obscure their awareness of the compassion that underlies parental
demands. Parents often tell me that they “have to” use punitive force
because they see no other way to influence their children to do “what’s

=== PAGE 177 ===
good for them.” They support their opinion with anecdotes of children
expressing appreciation for “seeing the light” after having been
punished. Having raised four children, I empathize deeply with parents
regarding the daily challenges they face in educating children and
keeping them safe. This does not, however, lessen my concern about the
use of physical punishment.
First, I wonder whether people who proclaim the successes of such
punishment are aware of the countless instances of children who turn
against what might be good for them simply because they choose to
fight, rather than succumb, to coercion. Second, the apparent success of
corporal punishment in influencing a child doesn’t mean that other
methods of influence wouldn’t have worked equally well. Finally, I share
the concerns of many parents about the social consequences of using
physical punishment. When parents opt to use force, we may win the
battle of getting children to do what we want, but, in the process, are we
not perpetuating a social norm that justifies violence as a means of
resolving differences?
Punishment also includes judgmental labeling and the withholding of
privileges.
In addition to the physical, other uses of force also qualify as
punishment. One is the use of blame to discredit another person; for
example, a parent may label a child as “wrong,” “selfish,” or “immature”
when a child doesn’t behave in a certain way. Another form of punitive
force is the withholding of some means of gratification, such as parents’
curtailing allowances or driving privileges. In this vein, the withdrawal
of caring or respect is one of the most powerful threats of all.
The Costs of Punishment
When we submit to doing something solely for the purpose of avoiding
punishment, our attention is distracted from the value of the action
itself. Instead, we are focusing upon the consequences, on what might
happen if we fail to take that action. If a worker’s performance is
prompted by fear of punishment, the job gets done, but morale suffers;
sooner or later, productivity will decrease. Self-esteem is also diminished
when punitive force is used. If children brush their teeth because they

=== PAGE 178 ===
fear shame and ridicule, their oral health may improve but their self-
respect will develop cavities. Furthermore, as we all know, punishment
is costly in terms of goodwill. The more we are seen as agents of
punishment, the harder it is for others to respond compassionately to our
needs.
When we fear punishment, we focus on consequences, not on our own
values.
Fear of punishment diminishes self-esteem and goodwill.
I was visiting a friend, a school principal, at his office when he noticed
through the window a big child hitting a smaller one. “Excuse me,” he
said as he leapt up and rushed to the playground. Grabbing the larger
child, he gave him a swat and scolded, “I’ll teach you not to hit smaller
people!” When the principal returned inside, I remarked, “I don’t think
you taught that child what you thought you were teaching him. I suspect
what he learned instead was not to hit people smaller than he is when
somebody bigger—like the principal—might be watching! If anything, it
seems to me that you have reinforced the notion that the way to get
what you want from somebody else is to hit them.”
In such situations, I recommend first empathizing with the child who
is behaving violently. For example, if I saw a child hit someone after
being called a name, I might empathize, “I’m sensing that you’re feeling
angry because you’d like to be treated with more respect.” If I guessed
correctly, and the child acknowledges this to be true, I would then
continue by expressing my own feelings, needs, and requests in the
situation without insinuating blame: “I’m feeling sad because I want us
to find ways to get respect that don’t turn people into enemies. I’d like
you to tell me if you’d be willing to explore with me some other ways to
get the respect you’re wanting.”
Two Questions That Reveal the Limitations of Punishment
Question 1: What do I want this person to do?
Question 2: What do I want this person’s reasons to be for doing it?

=== PAGE 179 ===
Two questions help us see why we are unlikely to get what we want
by using punishment to change people’s behavior. The first question is:
What do I want this person to do that’s different from what he or she is
currently doing? If we ask only this first question, punishment may seem
effective, because the threat or exercise of punitive force may well
influence someone’s behavior. However, with the second question, it
becomes evident that punishment isn’t likely to work: What do I want this
person’s reasons to be for doing what I’m asking? We seldom address the
latter question, but when we do, we soon realize that punishment and
reward interfere with people’s ability to do things motivated by the
reasons we’d like them to have. I believe it is critical to be aware of the
importance of people’s reasons for behaving as we request. For example,
blaming or punishing would obviously not be effective strategies if we
want children to clean their rooms out of either a desire for order or a
desire to contribute to their parents’ enjoyment of order. Often children
clean their rooms motivated by obedience to authority (“Because my
Mom said so”), avoidance of punishment, or fear of upsetting or being
rejected by parents. NVC, however, fosters a level of moral development
based on autonomy and interdependence, whereby we acknowledge
responsibility for our own actions and are aware that our own well-being
and that of others are one and the same.
The Protective Use of Force in Schools
I’d like to describe how some students and I used protective force to
bring order into a chaotic situation at an alternative school. This school
was designed for students who had dropped out or been expelled from
conventional classrooms. The administration and I hoped to demonstrate
that a school based on the principles of NVC would be able to reach
these students. My job was to train the faculty in NVC and serve as
consultant over the year. With only four days to prepare the faculty, I
was unable to sufficiently clarify the difference between NVC and
permissiveness. As a result, some teachers were ignoring, rather than
intervening in, situations of conflict and disturbing behavior. Besieged
by increasing pandemonium, the administrators were nearly ready to
shut down the school.

=== PAGE 180 ===
When I requested to talk with the students who had contributed most
to the turbulence, the principal selected eight boys, ages eleven to
fourteen, to meet with me. The following are excerpts from the dialogue
I had with the students.
MBR: (expressing my feeling and needs without asking probing questions) I’m very upset about the
teachers’ reports that things are getting out of hand in many of the classes. I want
very much for this school to be successful. I’m hopeful that you can help me
understand what the problems are and what can be done about them.
Will: The teachers in this school—they fools, man!
MBR: Are you saying, Will, that you are disgusted with the teachers and you want them to
change some things they do?
Will: No, man, they is fools because they just stand around and don’t do nothin’.
MBR: You mean you’re disgusted because you want them to do more when problems happen.
(This is a second attempt to receive the feelings and wants.)
Will: That’s right, man. No matter what anybody do they just stand there smilin’ like fools.
MBR: Would you be willing to give me an example of how the teachers do nothing?
Will: Easy. Just this morning a dude walks in wearin’ a bottle of Wild Turkey on his hip pocket
plain as day. Everybody seen it; the teacher, she seen it but she’s lookin’ the other
way.
MBR: It sounds to me, then, that you don’t have respect for the teachers when they stand
around doing nothing. You’d like them to do something. (This is a continued attempt
to fully understand.)
Will: Yeah.
MBR: I feel disappointed because I want them to be able to work things out with students, but
it sounds like I wasn’t able to show them what I meant.
The discussion then turned to one particularly pressing problem: that of
students who didn’t want to work disturbing those who did.
MBR: I’m anxious to try to solve this problem because the teachers tell me it’s the one that
bothers them the most. I would appreciate your sharing whatever ideas you have
with me.
Joe: The teacher got to get a rattan (a stick covered with leather that was carried by some
principals in St. Louis to administer corporal punishment).

=== PAGE 181 ===
MBR: So you’re saying, Joe, that you want the teachers to hit students when they bother
others.
Joe: That’s the only way students gonna stop playing the fool.
MBR: (still trying to receive Joe’s feelings) So you doubt that any other way would work.
Joe: (nods agreement)
MBR: I’m discouraged if that’s the only way. I hate that way of settling things and want to
learn other ways.
Ed: Why?
MBR: Several reasons. Like if I get you to stop horsing around in school by using the rattan, I’d
like you to tell me what happens if three or four of you that I’ve hit in class are out
by my car when I go home.
Ed: (smiling) Then you better have a big stick, man!
MBR: (Feeling certain I understood Ed’s message and certain he knew I understood, I continue
without paraphrasing it.) That’s what I mean. I’d like you to see I’m bothered about
that way of settling things. I’m too absentminded to always remember to carry a big
stick, and even if I remembered, I would hate to hit someone with it.
Ed: You could kick the cat out of school.
MBR: You’re suggesting, Ed, that you would like us to suspend or expel kids from the school?
Ed: Yeah.
MBR: I’m discouraged with that idea, too. I want to show that there are other ways of solving
differences in school without kicking people out. I’d feel like a failure if that was the
best we could do.
Will: If a dude ain’t doin’ nothin’, how come you can’t put him in a do-nothin’ room?
MBR: Are you suggesting, Will, that you would like to have a room to send people to if they
bother other students?
Will: That’s right. No use they bein’ in class if they ain’t doin’ nothin’.
MBR: I’m very interested in that idea. I’d like to hear how you think such a room might work.
Will: Sometimes you come to school and just feel evil: you don’t want to do nothin’. So we just
have a room students go to till they feel like doin’ somethin’.
MBR: I understand what you are saying, but I’m anticipating that the teacher will be concerned
about whether the students will go willingly to the do-nothing room. Will:

=== PAGE 182 ===
(confidently) They’ll go.
I said I thought the plan might work if we could show that the purpose
was not to punish, but to provide a place to go for those who weren’t
ready to study, and simultaneously a chance to study for those who
wanted to study. I also suggested that a do-nothing room would be more
likely to succeed if it was known to be a product of student
brainstorming rather than staff decree.
A do-nothing room was set up for students who were upset and didn’t
feel like doing schoolwork or whose behavior kept others from learning.
Sometimes students asked to go; sometimes teachers asked students to
go. We placed the teacher who had best mastered NVC in the do-nothing
room, where she had some very productive talks with the children who
came in. This set-up was an immense success in restoring order to the
school because the students who devised it made its purpose clear to
their peers: to protect the rights of students who wanted to learn. We
used the dialogue with the students to demonstrate to the teachers that
there were other means of resolving conflicts besides withdrawal from
the conflict or using punitive force.
Summary
In situations where there is no opportunity for communication, such as
in instances of imminent danger, we may need to resort to the protective
use of force. The intention behind the protective use of force is to
prevent injury or injustice, never to punish or to cause individuals to
suffer, repent, or change. The punitive use of force tends to generate
hostility and to reinforce resistance to the very behavior we are seeking.
Punishment damages goodwill and self-esteem, and shifts our attention
from the intrinsic value of an action to external consequences. Blaming
and punishing fail to contribute to the motivations we would like to
inspire in others.
Humanity has been sleeping
—and still sleeps–
lulled within the 
narrowly confining

=== PAGE 183 ===
joys of its 
closed loves.
—Pierre Teilhard de Chardin,
theologian and scientist

=== PAGE 184 ===
CHAPTER TWELVE

=== PAGE 185 ===
W
Liberating Ourselves and Counseling Others
Freeing Ourselves From Old Programming
e’ve all learned things that limit us as human beings, whether from
well-intentioned parents, teachers, clergy, or others. Passed down
through generations, even centuries, much of this destructive cultural
learning is so ingrained in our lives that we are no longer conscious of it.
In one of his routines, comedian Buddy Hackett, raised on his mother’s
rich cooking, claimed that he never realized it was possible to leave the
table without feeling heartburn until he was in the army. In the same
way, pain engendered by damaging cultural conditioning is such an
integral part of our lives that we can no longer distinguish its presence.
It takes tremendous energy and awareness to recognize this destructive
learning and to transform it into thoughts and behaviors that are of
value and of service to life.
This transformation requires a literacy of needs and the ability to get
in touch with ourselves, both of which are difficult for people in our
culture. Not only have we never been educated about our needs, we are
often exposed to cultural training that actively blocks our consciousness
of them. As mentioned earlier, we have inherited a language that served
kings and powerful elites in domination societies. The masses,
discouraged from developing awareness of their own needs, have instead
been educated to be docile and subservient to authority. Our culture
implies that needs are negative and destructive; the word needy applied
to a person suggests inadequacy or immaturity. When people express
their needs, they are often labeled selfish, and the use of the personal
pronoun I is at times equated with selfishness or neediness.
We can liberate ourselves from cultural conditioning.
By encouraging us to separate observation and evaluation, to
acknowledge the thoughts or needs shaping our feelings, and to express
our requests in clear action language, NVC heightens our awareness of
the cultural conditioning influencing us at any given moment. And
drawing this conditioning into the light of consciousness is a key step in

=== PAGE 186 ===
breaking its hold on us.
Resolving Internal Conflicts
We can apply NVC to resolve the internal conflicts that often result in
depression. In his book The Revolution in Psychiatry, Ernest Becker
attributes depression to “cognitively arrested alternatives.” This means
that when we have a judgmental dialogue going on within, we become
alienated from what we are needing and cannot then act to meet those
needs. Depression is indicative of a state of alienation from our own
needs.
A woman studying NVC was suffering a profound bout of depression.
She was asked to identify the voices within her when she felt the most
depressed and to write them down in dialogue form as though they were
speaking to each other. These were the first two lines of her dialogue:
Voice 1 (“career woman”): I should do something more with my life. I’m wasting my education and
talents.
Voice 2 (“responsible mother”): You’re being unrealistic. You’re a mother of two children and can’t
handle that responsibility, so how can you handle anything else?
Notice how these inner messages are infested with judgmental terms
and phrases such as should, wasting my education and talents, and can’t
handle. Variations of this dialogue had been running in this woman’s
head for months. She was asked to imagine the “career woman” voice
taking an “NVC pill” in order to restate its message in the following
form: “When a, I feel b, because I am needing c. Therefore I now would
like d.”
She subsequently translated “I should do something with my life. I’m
wasting my education and talents” into: “When I spend as much time at
home with the children as I do without practicing my profession, I feel
depressed and discouraged because I am needing the fulfillment I once
had in my profession. Therefore, I now would like to find part-time work
in my profession.”
Then it was the turn of her “responsible mother” voice to undergo the
same process of translation. These lines, “You’re being unrealistic. You’re
a mother of two children and can’t handle that responsibility, so how can

=== PAGE 187 ===
you handle anything else?” were transformed into: “When I imagine
going to work, I feel scared because I’m needing reassurance that the
children will be well taken care of. Therefore, I now would like to plan
how to provide high-quality child care while I work and how to find
sufficient time to be with the children when I am not tired.”
The ability to hear our own feelings and needs and empathize with
them can free us from depression.
This woman felt great relief as soon as she translated her inner
messages into NVC. She was able to get beneath the alienating messages
she was repeating to herself and offer herself empathy. Although she still
faced practical challenges, such as securing quality child care and her
husband’s support, she was no longer subject to the judgmental internal
dialogue that kept her from being aware of her own needs.
Caring for Our Inner Environment
When we are entangled in critical, blaming, or angry thoughts, it is
difficult to establish a healthy internal environment for ourselves. NVC
helps us create a more peaceful state of mind by encouraging us to focus
on what we are truly wanting rather than on what is wrong with others
or ourselves.
A participant once reported a profound personal breakthrough during
a three-day training. One of her goals for the workshop was to take
better care of herself, but she woke at dawn the second morning with
the worst headache in recent memory. “Normally, the first thing I’d do
would be to analyze what I had done wrong. Did I eat the wrong food?
Did I let myself get stressed-out? Did Ido this; did I not do that? But,
since I had been working on using NVC to take better care of myself, I
asked instead, ‘What do I need to do for myself right now with this
headache?’
“I sat up and did a lot of really slow neck rolls, then got up and
walked around, and did other things to take care of myself right then
instead of beating up on myself. My headache relaxed to the point where
I was able to go through the day’s workshop. This was a major, major
breakthrough for me. What I understood, when I empathized with the

=== PAGE 188 ===
headache, was that I hadn’t given myself enough attention the day
before, and the headache was a way to say to myself, ‘I need more
attention.’ I ended up giving myself the attention I needed and was then
able to make it through the workshop. I’ve had headaches all my life,
and this was a very remarkable turning point for me.”
Focus on what we want to do rather than what went wrong.
At another workshop a participant asked how NVC might be used to
free us from anger-provoking messages when we are driving on the
freeway. This was a familiar topic for me! For years my work involved
traveling by car across the country, and I was worn and frazzled by the
violence-provoking messages racing through my brain. Everybody who
wasn’t driving by my standards was an archenemy, a villain. Thoughts
spewed through my head: “What the hell is the matter with that guy!?
Doesn’t he even watch where he’s driving?” In that state of mind, all I
wanted was to punish the other drivers, and since I couldn’t do that, the
anger lodged in my body and exacted its toll.
Defuse stress by hearing our own feelings and needs.
Eventually I learned to translate my judgments into feelings and needs
and to give myself empathy: “Boy, I am petrified when people drive like
that; I really wish they would see the danger in what they are doing!”
Whew! I was amazed how I could create a less stressful situation for
myself by simply becoming aware of what I was feeling and needing
rather than blaming others.
Defuse stress by empathizing with others.
Later I decided to practice empathy toward other drivers and was
rewarded with a gratifying first experience. I was stuck behind a car
going far below the speed limit and slowing down at every intersection.
Fuming and grumbling, “That’s no way to drive,” I noticed the stress I
was causing myself and shifted my thinking instead to what the other
driver might be feeling and needing. I sensed that the person was lost,
feeling confused, and wishing for some patience from those of us
following. When the road widened enough for me to pass, I saw that the
driver was a woman who looked to be in her eighties with an expression

=== PAGE 189 ===
of terror on her face. I was pleased that my attempt at empathy had kept
me from honking the horn or engaging in my customary tactics of
displaying displeasure toward people whose driving bothered me.
Replacing Diagnosis With NVC
Many years ago, after having just invested nine years of my life in the
training and diplomas necessary to qualify as a psychotherapist, I came
across a dialogue between the Israeli philosopher Martin Buber and the
American psychologist Carl Rogers in which Buber questions whether
anyone can do psychotherapy in the role of a psychotherapist. Buber was
visiting the United States at the time and had been invited, along with
Carl Rogers, to a discussion at a mental hospital in front of a group of
mental health professionals.
In this dialogue Buber posits that human growth occurs through a
meeting between two individuals who express themselves vulnerably
and authentically in what he termed an “I-Thou”
relationship. He did not believe that this type of authenticity was
likely to exist when people meet in the roles of psychotherapist and
client. Rogers agreed that authenticity was a prerequisite to growth. He
maintained, however, that enlightened psychotherapists could choose to
transcend their own role and encounter their clients authentically.
Buber was skeptical. He was of the opinion that even if
psychotherapists were committed and able to relate to their clients in an
authentic fashion, such encounters would be impossible as long as
clients 
continued 
to 
view 
themselves 
as 
clients 
and 
their
psychotherapists as psychotherapists. He observed how the very process
of making appointments to see someone at their office, and paying fees
to be “fixed,” dimmed the likelihood of an authentic relationship
developing between two persons.
This dialogue clarified my own long-standing ambivalence toward
clinical 
detachment—a 
sacrosanct 
rule 
in 
the 
psychoanalytic
psychotherapy I was taught. To bring one’s own feelings and needs into
the psychotherapy was typically viewed as a sign of pathology on the
part of the therapist. Competent psychotherapists were to stay out of the
therapy process and to function as a mirror onto which clients projected

=== PAGE 190 ===
their transferences, which were then worked through with the
psychotherapist’s help. I understood the theory behind keeping the
psychotherapist’s inner process out of psychotherapy and guarding
against the danger of addressing internal conflicts at the client’s expense.
However, I had always been uncomfortable maintaining the requisite
emotional distance, and furthermore believed in the advantages of
bringing myself into the process.
I thus began to experiment by replacing clinical language with the
language of NVC. Instead of interpreting what my clients were saying in
line with the personality theories I had studied, I made myself present to
their words and listened empathically. Instead of diagnosing them, I
revealed what was going on within myself. At first, this was frightening.
I worried about how colleagues would react to the authenticity with
which I was entering into dialogue with clients. However, the results
were so gratifying to both my clients and myself that I soon overcame
any hesitation. Today, thirty-five years later, the concept of bringing
oneself fully into the client-therapist relationship is no longer heretical,
but when I began practicing this way, I was often invited to speak to
groups of psychotherapists who would challenge me to demonstrate this
new role.
I empathized with clients instead of interpreting them; I revealed
myself instead of diagnosing them.
Once I was asked, by a large gathering of mental health professionals
at a state mental hospital, to show how NVC might serve in counseling
distressed people. After my one-hour presentation, I was requested to
interview a patient in order to produce an evaluation and
recommendation for treatment. I talked with the twenty-nine-year-old
mother of three children for about half an hour. After she left the room,
the staff responsible for her care posed their questions. “Dr. Rosenberg,”
her psychiatrist began, “please make a differential diagnosis. In your
opinion, is this woman manifesting a schizophrenic reaction or is this a
case of drug-induced psychosis?”
I said that I was uncomfortable with such questions. Even when I
worked in a mental hospital during my training, I was never sure how to
fit people into the diagnostic classifications. Since then I had read

=== PAGE 191 ===
research indicating a lack of agreement among psychiatrists and
psychologists regarding these terms. The reports concluded that
diagnoses of patients in mental hospitals depended more upon the school
the psychiatrist had attended than the characteristics of the patients
themselves.
I would be reluctant, I continued, to apply these terms even if
consistent usage did exist, because I failed to see how they benefited
patients. In physical medicine, pinpointing the disease process that has
created the illness often gives clear direction to its treatment, but I did
not perceive this relationship in the field we call mental illness. In my
experience of case conferences at hospitals, the staff would spend most
of its time deliberating over a diagnosis. As the allotted hour threatened
to run out, the psychiatrist in charge of the case might appeal to the
others for help in setting up a treatment plan. Often this request would
be ignored in favor of continued wrangling over the diagnosis.
I explained to the psychiatrist that NVC urges me to ask myself the
following questions rather than think in terms of what is wrong with a
patient: “What is this person feeling? What is she or he needing? How
am I feeling in response to this person, and what needs of mine are
behind my feelings? What action or decision would I request this person
to take in the belief that it would enable them to live more happily?”
Because our responses to these questions would reveal a lot about
ourselves and our values, we would feel far more vulnerable than if we
were to simply diagnose the other person.
On another occasion, I was called to demonstrate how NVC could be
taught to people diagnosed as chronic schizophrenics. With about eighty
psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, and nurses watching, fifteen
patients who had been thus diagnosed were assembled on the stage for
me. As I introduced myself and explained the purpose of NVC, one of the
patients expressed a reaction that seemed irrelevant to what I was
saying. Aware that he’d been diagnosed as a chronic schizophrenic, I
succumbed to clinical thinking by assuming that my failure to
understand him was due to his confusion. “You seem to have trouble
following what I’m saying,” I remarked.
At this, another patient interjected, “I understand what he’s saying,”
and proceeded to explain the relevance of the first patient’s words in the

=== PAGE 192 ===
context of my introduction. Recognizing that the man was not confused,
but that I had simply not grasped the connection between our thoughts, I
was dismayed by the ease with which I had attributed responsibility for
the breakdown in communication to him. I would have liked to have
owned my own feelings by saying, for example, “I’m confused. I’d like to
see the connection between what I said and your response, but I don’t.
Would you be willing to explain how your words relate to what I said?”
With the exception of this brief departure into clinical thinking, the
session with the patients went successfully. The staff, impressed with the
patients’ responses, wondered whether I considered them to be an
unusually cooperative group of patients. I answered that when I avoided
diagnosing people and instead stayed connected to the life going on in
them and in myself, people usually responded positively.
A staff member then requested a similar session be conducted, as a
learning experience, with some of the psychologists and psychiatrists as
participants. At this, the patients who had been on stage exchanged seats
with several volunteers in the audience. In working with the staff, I had
a difficult time clarifying to one psychiatrist the difference between
intellectual understanding and the empathy of NVC. Whenever someone
in the group expressed feelings, he would offer his understanding of the
psychological dynamics behind their feelings rather than empathize with
the feelings. When this happened for the third time, one of the patients
in the audience burst out, “Can’t you see you’re doing it again? You’re
interpreting what she’s saying rather than empathizing with her
feelings!”
By adopting the skills and consciousness of NVC, we can counsel
others in encounters that are genuine, open, and mutual, rather than
resort to professional relationships characterized by emotional distance,
diagnosis, and hierarchy.
Summary
NVC enhances inner communication by helping us translate negative
internal messages into feelings and needs. Our ability to distinguish our
own feelings and needs and to empathize with them can free us from
depression. By showing us how to focus on what we truly want rather

=== PAGE 193 ===
than on what is wrong with others or ourselves, NVC gives us the tools
and understanding to create a more peaceful state of mind. Professionals
in counseling and psychotherapy may also use NVC to engender mutual
and authentic relationships with their clients.
NVC in Action
Dealing With Resentment and Self-Judgment
A student of Nonviolent Communication shares the following story.
I had just returned from my first residential training in NVC. A friend whom I
hadn’t seen for two years was waiting for me at home. I first met Iris, who had been
a school librarian for twenty-five years, during an intense two-week heartwork and
wilderness journey that culminated in a three-day solo fast in the Rockies. After she
listened to my enthusiastic description of NVC, Iris revealed that she was still
hurting from what one of the wilderness leaders in Colorado had said to her six
years before. I had a clear memory of that person: wild-woman Leav, her palms,
gouged with rope cuts, holding steady a belayed body dangling against the
mountain face; she read animal droppings, howled in the dark, danced her joy,
cried her truth, and mooned our bus as we waved good-bye for the last time. What
Iris had heard Leav say during one of the personal feedback sessions was this:
“Iris, I can’t stand people like you, always and everywhere being so damn nice
and sweet, constantly the meek little librarian that you are. Why don’t you just
drop it and get on with it?”
For six years Iris had been listening to Leav’s voice in her head, and for six years
she’d been answering Leav in her head. We were both eager to explore how a
consciousness of NVC could have affected the situation. I role-played Leav and
repeated her statement to Iris.
Iris: (forgetting about NVC and hearing criticism and putdown) You have no right to
say that to me. You don’t know who I am, or what kind of librarian I
am! I take my profession seriously, and for your information, I consider
myself to be an educator, just like any teacher …
Me: (with NVC consciousness, listening empathically, as if I were Leav) It sounds to
me like you’re angry because you want me to know and recognize who
you really are before criticizing you. Is that so?
Iris: That’s right! You have simply no idea how much it took for me to even sign

=== PAGE 194 ===
up for this trek. Look! Here I am: I finished, didn’t I? I took on all the
challenges these fourteen days and overcame them all!
Me: Am I hearing that you feel hurt and would have liked some recognition and
appreciation for all your courage and hard work?
A few more exchanges followed, whereupon Iris showed a shift; these shifts, when a
person feels “heard” to his or her satisfaction, can often be observed bodily. For
instance, a person may relax and take a deeper breath. This often indicates that the
person has received adequate empathy and is now able to shift attention to
something other than the pain they have been expressing. Sometimes they are
ready to hear another person’s feelings and needs. Or sometimes another round of
empathy is needed to attend to another area of pain. In this situation with Iris, I
could see that another piece needed attention before she would be able to hear
Leav. This is because Iris had had six years of opportunities to put herself down for
not having produced an honorable comeback on the spot. After the subtle shift, she
immediately went on:
Iris: Darn, I should have said all this stuff to her six years ago!
Me: (as myself, an empathic friend) You’re frustrated because you wish you could
have articulated yourself better at the time?
Iris: I feel like such an idiot! I knew I wasn’t a “meek little librarian,” but why
didn’t I say that to her?
Me: So you wish you had been enough in touch with yourself to say that?
Iris: Yes. And I’m also mad at myself! I wish I hadn’t let her push me around.
Me: You’d like to have been more assertive than you were?
Iris: Exactly. I need to remember I have a right to stand up for who I am. Iris was
quiet for a few seconds. She expressed readiness to practice NVC and
hear what Leav said to her in a different way.
Me: (as Leav) Iris, I can’t stand people like you, always so nice and sweet, being
forever the meek little librarian. Why don’t you just drop it and get on
with it?
Iris: (listening for Leav’s feelings, needs, and requests) Oh, Leav, it sounds to me like
you’re really frustrated … frustrated because … because I …
Here Iris catches herself at a common mistake. By using the word I, she attributes
Leav’s feeling to Iris herself, rather than to some desire on Leav’s own part that

=== PAGE 195 ===
generates the feeling. That is, not “You’re frustrated because I am a certain way,”
but “You’re frustrated because you wanted something different from me.”
Iris: (trying again) Okay, Leav, it sounds like you’re really frustrated because you
are wanting … um … you’re wanting …
As I tried in my role-play to earnestly identify with Leav, I felt a sudden flash of
awareness of what I (as Leav) was yearning for:
Me: (as Leav) Connection! … That’s what I am wanting! I want to feel connected
… with you, Iris! And I am so frustrated with all the sweetness and
niceness that stand in the way that I just want to tear it all down so I
can truly touch you!
We both sat a bit stunned after this outburst, and then Iris said, “If I had known
that’s what she had wanted, if she could have told me that it was genuine
connection with me she was after … Gosh, I mean, that feels almost loving.” While
she never did find the real Leav to verify the insight, after this practice session in
NVC, Iris achieved an internal resolution about this nagging conflict and found it
easier to hear with a new awareness when people around her said things to her that
she might previously have interpreted as “putdowns.”
… the more you become a connoisseur of gratitude, the less you are a
victim of resentment, depression, and despair. Gratitude will act as an
elixir that will gradually dissolve the hard shell of your ego—your need to
possess and control—and transform you into a generous being. The sense
of gratitude produces true spiritual alchemy, makes us magnanimous–large
souled.
—Sam Keen, philosopher

=== PAGE 196 ===
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

=== PAGE 197 ===
S
Expressing Appreciation in Nonviolent Communication
The Intention Behind the Appreciation
“You did a good job on that report.”
“You are a very sensitive person.”
“It was kind of you to offer me a ride home last evening.”
uch statements are typically uttered as expressions of appreciation in
life-alienating communication. Perhaps you are surprised that I regard
praise and compliments to be life-alienating. Notice, however, that
appreciation expressed in this form reveals little of what’s going on in
the speaker; it establishes the speaker as someone who sits in judgment.
I define judgments—both positive and negative—as life-alienating
communication.
Compliments are often judgments—however positive—of others.
In corporate trainings, I often encounter managers who defend the
practice of praising and complimenting by claiming that “it works.”
“Research shows,” they assert, “that if a manager compliments
employees, they work harder. And the same goes for schools: if teachers
praise students, they study harder.” I have reviewed this research, and
my belief is that recipients of such praise do work harder, but only
initially. Once they sense the manipulation behind the appreciation,
their productivity drops.
What is most disturbing for me, however, is that the beauty of
appreciation is spoiled when people begin to notice the lurking intent to
get something out of them.
Furthermore, when we use positive feedback as a means to influence
others, it may not be clear how they are receiving the message. There is
a cartoon where one Native American remarks to another, “Watch me
use modern psychology on my horse!” He then leads his friend to where
the horse can overhear their conversation and exclaims, “I have the
fastest, most courageous horse in all the West!” The horse looks sad and
says to itself, “How do you like that? He’s gone and bought himself

=== PAGE 198 ===
another horse.”
Express appreciation to celebrate, not to manipulate.
When we use NVC to express appreciation, it is purely to celebrate,
not to get something in return. Our sole intention is to celebrate the way
our lives have been enriched by others.
The Three Components of Appreciation
NVC clearly distinguishes three components in the expression of
appreciation:
1. the actions that have contributed to our well-being
2. the particular needs of ours that have been fulfilled
3. the pleasureful feelings engendered by the fulfillment of
those needs
The sequence of these ingredients may vary; sometimes all three can
be conveyed by a smile or a simple “Thank you.” However, if we want to
ensure that our appreciation has been fully received, it is valuable to
develop the eloquence to express all three components verbally. The
following dialogue illustrates how praise may be transformed into an
appreciation that embraces all three components.
Saying “thank you” in NVC: “This is what you did; this is what I feel;
this is the need of mine that was met.”
Participant: (approaching me after a workshop) Marshall, you’re brilliant!
MBR: I’m not able to get as much out of your appreciation as I would like.
Participant: Why, what do you mean?
MBR: In my lifetime I’ve been called a multitude of names, yet I can’t recall seriously learning
anything by being told what I am. I’d like to learn from your appreciation and enjoy
it, but I would need more information.
Participant: Like what?
MBR: First, I’d like to know what I said or did that made life more wonderful for you.

=== PAGE 199 ===
Participant: Well, you’re so intelligent.
MBR: I’m afraid you’ve just given me another judgment that still leaves me wondering what I
did that made life more wonderful for you.
Participant: (thinks for a while, then points to notes she had taken during the workshop) Look at
these two places. It was these two things you said.
MBR: Ah, so it’s my saying those two things that you appreciate.
Participant: Yes.
MBR: Next, I’d like to know how you feel in conjunction to my having said those two things.
Participant: Hopeful and relieved.
MBR: And now I’d like to know what needs of yours were fulfilled by my saying those two
things.
Participant: I have this eighteen-year-old son whom I haven’t been able to communicate with.
I’d been desperately searching for some direction that might help me to relate with
him in a more loving manner, and those two things you said provide the direction I
was looking for.
Hearing all three pieces of information—what I did, how she felt, and
what needs of hers were fulfilled—I could then celebrate the
appreciation with her. Had she initially expressed her appreciation in
NVC, it might have sounded like this: “Marshall, when you said these
two things (showing me her notes), I felt very hopeful and relieved,
because I’ve been searching for a way to make a connection with my
son, and these gave me the direction I was looking for.”
Receiving Appreciation
For many of us, it is difficult to receive appreciation gracefully. We fret
over whether we deserve it. We worry about what’s being expected of us
—especially if we have teachers or managers who use appreciation as a
means to spur productivity. Or we’re nervous about living up to the
appreciation. Accustomed to a culture where buying, earning, and
deserving are the standard modes of interchange, we are often
uncomfortable with simple giving and receiving.
NVC encourages us to receive appreciation with the same quality of
empathy we express when listening to other messages. We hear what we

=== PAGE 200 ===
O
have done that has contributed to others’ well-being; we hear their
feelings and the needs that were fulfilled. We take into our hearts the
joyous reality that we can each enhance the quality of others’ lives.
I was taught to receive appreciation with grace by my friend Nafez
Assailey. He was a member of a Palestinian team whom I had invited to
Switzerland for training in NVC at a time when security precautions
made training of mixed groups of Palestinians and Israelis impossible in
either of their own countries. At the end of the workshop, Nafez came up
to me. “This training will be very valuable for us in working for peace in
our country,” he acknowledged. “I would like to thank you in a way that
we Sufi Muslims do when we want to express special appreciation for
something.” Locking his thumb onto mine, he looked me in the eye and
said, “I kiss the God in you that allows you to give us what you did.” He
then kissed my hand.
Receive appreciation without feelings of superiority or false humility.
Nafez’s expression of gratitude showed me a different way to receive
appreciation. Usually it is received from one of two polar positions. At
one end is egotism, believing ourselves to be superior because we’ve
been appreciated. At the other extreme is false humility, denying the
importance of the appreciation by shrugging it off: “Oh, it was nothing.”
Nafez showed me that I could receive appreciation joyfully, in the
awareness that God has given everyone the power to enrich the lives of
others. If I am aware that it is this power of God working through me
that gives me the power to enrich life for others, then I may avoid both
the ego trap and the false humility.
Golda Meir, when she was the Israeli prime minister, once chided one
of her ministers: “Don’t be so humble, you’re not that great.” The
following lines, attributed to contemporary writer Marianne Williamson,
serve as another reminder for me to avoid the pitfall of false humility:
ur deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we are
powerful beyond measure.
It is our light, not our darkness, that frightens us. You are a child of God. Your
playing small doesn’t serve the world.
There’s nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other people won’t feel

=== PAGE 201 ===
insecure around you.
We were born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It’s not just in
some of us, it is in everyone.
And as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give other people
permission to do the same.
As we are liberated from our fear, our presence automatically liberates others.
The Hunger for Appreciation
Paradoxically, despite our unease in receiving appreciation, most of us
yearn to be genuinely recognized and appreciated. During a surprise
party for me, a twelve-year-old friend of mine suggested a party game to
help introduce the guests to each other. We were to write down a
question, drop it in a box, and then take turns, each person drawing out
a question and responding to it out loud.
Having recently consulted with various social service agencies and
industrial organizations, I was feeling struck by how often people
expressed a hunger for appreciation on the job. “No matter how hard
you work,” they would sigh, “you never hear a good word from anyone.
But make one mistake and there’s always someone jumping all over
you.” So for the game, I wrote this question: “What appreciation might
someone give you that would leave you jumping for joy?”
A woman drew that question out of the box, read it, and started to cry.
As director of a shelter for battered women, she would put considerable
energy each month into creating a schedule to please as many people as
possible. Yet each time the schedule was presented, at least a couple of
individuals would complain. She couldn’t remember ever receiving
appreciation for her efforts to design a fair schedule. All this had flashed
through her mind as she read my question, and the hunger for
appreciation brought tears to her eyes. Upon hearing the woman’s story,
another friend of mine said that he, too, would like to answer the
question. Everyone else then requested a turn; as they responded to the
question, several people wept.
We tend to notice what’s wrong rather than what’s right.

=== PAGE 202 ===
While the craving for appreciation—as opposed to manipulative
“strokes”—is particularly evident in the workplace, it affects family life
as well. One evening when I pointed out his failure to perform a house
chore, my son Brett retorted, “Dad, are you aware how often you bring
up what’s gone wrong but almost never bring up what’s gone right?” His
observation stayed with me. I realized how I was continually searching
for improvements, while barely stopping to celebrate things that were
going well. I had just completed a workshop with more than a hundred
participants, all of whom had evaluated it very highly, with the
exception of one person. However, what lingered in my mind was that
one person’s dissatisfaction.
That evening I wrote a song that began like this:
     If I’m ninety-eight percent perfect
     in anything I do,
     it’s the two percent I’ve messed up
     I’ll remember when I’m through.
It occurred to me that I had a choice to adopt instead the outlook of a
teacher I knew. One of her students, having neglected to study for an
exam, had resigned himself to turning in a blank piece of paper with his
name at the top. He was surprised when she later returned the test to
him with a grade of 14 percent. “What did I get 14 percent for?” he
asked incredulously. “Neatness,” she replied. Ever since hearing my son
Brett’s wake-up call, I’ve tried to be more aware of what others around
me are doing that enriches my life, and to hone my skills in expressing
this appreciation.
Overcoming the Reluctance to Express Appreciation
I was deeply touched by a passage in John Powell’s book The Secret of
Staying in Love, in which Powell describes his sadness over having been
unable, during his father’s lifetime, to express the appreciation he felt for
his father to his father. How grievous it seemed to me to miss the chance
of appreciating the people who have been the greatest positive
influences in our lives!
Immediately an uncle of mine, Julius Fox, came to mind. When I was

=== PAGE 203 ===
a boy, he came daily to offer nursing care to my grandmother, who was
totally paralyzed. While he cared for my grandmother, he always had a
warm and loving smile on his face. No matter how unpleasant the task
may have appeared to my boyish eyes, he treated her as if she were
doing him the greatest favor in the world by letting him care for her.
This provided a wonderful model of masculine strength for me—one that
I’ve often called upon in the years since.
I realized that I had never expressed my appreciation for my uncle,
who himself was now ill and near death. I considered doing so, but
sensed my own resistance: “I’m sure he already knows how much he
means to me, I don’t need to express it out loud; besides, it might
embarrass him if I put it into words.” As soon as these thoughts entered
my head, I already knew they weren’t true. Too often I had assumed that
others knew the intensity of my appreciation for them, only to discover
otherwise. And even when people were embarrassed, they still wanted to
hear appreciation verbalized.
Still hesitant, I told myself that words couldn’t do justice to the depth
of what I wished to communicate. I quickly saw through that one,
though: yes, words may be poor vehicles in conveying our heartfelt
realities, but as I have learned, “Anything that is worth doing is worth
doing poorly!”
As it happened, I soon found myself seated next to Uncle Julius at a
family gathering, and the words simply flowed out of me. He took them
in joyfully, without embarrassment. Brimming over with feelings from
the evening, I went home, composed a poem and sent it to him. I was
later told that each day until he died three weeks later, my uncle had
asked that the poem be read to him.
Summary
Conventional compliments often take the form of judgments, however
positive, and are sometimes intended to manipulate the behavior of
others. NVC encourages the expression of appreciation solely for
celebration. We state (1) the action that has contributed to our well-
being, (2) the particular need of ours that has been fulfilled, and (3) the
feelings of pleasure engendered as a result.

=== PAGE 204 ===
When we receive appreciation expressed in this way, we can do so
without any feeling of superiority or false humility—instead we can
celebrate along with the person who is offering the appreciation.

=== PAGE 205 ===
I
Epilogue
once asked my uncle Julius how he had developed such a remarkable
capacity to give compassionately. He seemed honored by my question,
which he pondered before replying, “I’ve been blessed with good
teachers.” When I asked who these were, he recalled, “Your grandmother
was the best teacher I had. You lived with her when she was already ill,
so you didn’t know what she was really like. For example, did your
mother ever tell you about the time during the Depression when your
grandmother brought a tailor and his wife and two children to live with
her for three years, after he lost his house and business?” I remembered
the story well. It had left a deep impression when my mother first told it
to me because I could never figure out where grandmother had found
space for the tailor’s family when she was raising nine children of her
own in a modest-sized house!
Uncle Julius recollected my grandmother’s compassion in a few more
anecdotes, all of which I had heard as a child. Then he asked, “Surely
your mother told you about Jesus.“
“About who?”
“Jesus.”
“No, she never told me about Jesus.”
The story about Jesus was the final precious gift I received from my
uncle before he died. It’s a true story of a time when a man came to my
grandmother’s back door asking for some food. This wasn’t unusual.
Although grandmother was very poor, the entire neighborhood knew
that she would feed anyone who showed up at her door. This man had a
beard and wild, scraggly black hair; his clothes were ragged, and he
wore a cross around his neck fashioned out of branches tied with rope.
My grandmother invited him into her kitchen for some food, and while
he was eating she asked his name.
“My name is Jesus,” he replied.
“Do you have a last name?” she inquired.
“I am Jesus the Lord.” (My grandmother’s English wasn’t too good.

=== PAGE 206 ===
Another uncle, Isidor, later told me he had come into the kitchen while
the man was still eating, and grandmother had introduced the stranger
as Mr. Thelord.) As the man continued to eat, my grandmother asked
where he lived.
“I don’t have a home.”
“Well, where are you going to stay tonight? It’s cold.”
“I don’t know.”
“Would you like to stay here?” she offered.
He stayed seven years.
When it came to communicating nonviolently, my grandmother was a
natural. She didn’t think of what this man “was.” If she had, she
probably would have judged him as crazy and gotten rid of him. No, she
thought in terms of what people feel and what they need. If they’re
hungry, feed them. If they’re without a roof over their head, give them a
place to sleep.
My grandmother loved to dance, and my mother remembers her
saying often, “Never walk when you can dance.” And thus I end this
book on a language of compassion with a song about my grandmother,
who spoke and lived the language of Nonviolent Communication.
One day a man named Jesus
came around to my grandmother’s door.
He asked for a little food, she gave him more.
He said he was Jesus the Lord;
she didn’t check him out w th Rome.
He stayed for several years, as
did many without a home.
It was in her Jewish way,
she taught me what Jesus had to say.
In that precious way,

=== PAGE 207 ===
she taught me what Jesus had to say.
And that’s: “Feed the hungry, heal the sick, then take a rest.
Never walk when you can dance;
make your home a cozy nest.”
It was in her Jewish way,
she taught me what Jesus had to say.
In her precious way,
she taught me what Jesus had to say.
—”Grandma & Jesus” by Marshall B. Rosenberg

=== PAGE 208 ===
Bibliography
Alinsky, Saul D. Rules for Radicals: A Pragmatic Primer for Realistic Radicals. New York:
Random House, 1971.
Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York: Viking
Press, 1963.
Becker, Ernest. The Birth and Death of Meaning: An Interdisciplinary
Perspective on the Problem of Man. New York: Free Press, 1971. ———. The Revolution in
Psychiatry: The New Understanding of Man.
New York: Free Press, 1964.
Benedict, Ruth. “Synergy—Patterns of the Good Culture.” Psychology Today 4 (June 1970):
53–77.
Boserup, Anders, and Andrew Mack. War Without Weapons: Non-Violence in National Defence.
New York: Schocken Books, 1975.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. Schooling in Capitalist America:
Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books, 1976.
Buber, Martin. I and Thou. Translated by Ronald Gregor Smith. New York: Scribner, 1958.
Craig, James, and Marguerite Craig. Synergic Power Beyond Domination and Permissiveness.
Berkeley, CA: Proactive Press, 1974.
Dass, Ram. The Only Dance There Is. New York: Jason Aronson, 1985. Dass, Ram, and Mirabai
Bush. Compassion in Action: Setting Out on the Path of Service. New York: Bell Tower, 1992.
Dass, Ram, and Paul Gorman. How Can I Help? Stories and Reflections on Service. New York:
Knopf, 1985.
Domhoff, William G. The Higher Circles: The Governing Class in America. New York: Vintage
Books, 1971.
Ellis, Albert, and Robert A. Harper. A Guide to Rational Living. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1961.
Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Translated by Myra Bergman Ramos. New York:
Herder and Herder, 1970.
Fromm, Erich. Escape from Freedom. New York: Farrar & Rinehart, Inc., 1941.

=== PAGE 209 ===
Fromm, Erich. The Art of Loving. New York: Harper & Row, 1956.
Gardner, Herb. A Thousand Clowns, in The Collected Plays. New York: Applause Books, 2000.
Gendlin, Eugene. Focusing. New York: Everest House, 1978.
Glenn, Michael, and Richard Kunnes. Repression or Revolution? Therapy
in the United States Today. New York: Harper and Row, 1973.
Greenburg, Dan, and Marcia Jacobs. How to Make Yourself Miserable for the Rest of the Century:
Another Vital Training Manual. New York: Vintage Books, 1987.
Harvey, O.J. Conceptual Systems and Personality Organization. New York: Wiley, 1961.
Hillesum, Etty. Etty: A Diary, 1941–1943. Introduced by J. G.
Gaarlandt; translated by Arnold J. Pomerans. London: Jonathan Cape, 1983
Holt, John. How Children Fail. New York: Pitman, 1964.
Humphreys, Christmas. The Way of Action: A Working Philosophy for Western Life. New York:
MacMillan, 1960.
Irwin, Robert. Building a Peace System: Exploratory Project on the Conditions of Peace. Expro
Press, 1989.
Johnson, Wendell. Living with Change: The Semantics of Coping. New York: Harper and Row,
1972.
Katz, Michael B. Class, Bureaucracy and Schools: The Illusion of Educational Change in America.
New York: Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1975.
Katz, Michael B., ed. School Reform: Past and Present. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1971.
Kaufmann, Walter. Without Guilt and Justice: From Decidophobia to Autonomy. New York: P.H.
Wyden, 1973.
Keen, Sam. Hymns to an Unknown God: Awakening the Spirit in Everyday Life. New York:
Bantam Books, 1994.
———. To a Dancing God. New York: Harper and Row, 1970. Kelly, George A. The Psychology
of Personal Constructs. 2 vols. New York: Norton, 1955.
Kornfield, Jack. A Path with Heart: A Guide Through the Perils and Promises of Spiritual Life.
New York: Bantam Books, 1993.
Kozol, Jonathan. The Night Is Dark and I Am Far from Home. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin Co.,
1975.
Kurtz, Ernest, and Katherine Ketcham. The Spirituality of Imperfection: Modern Wisdom from

=== PAGE 210 ===
Classic Stories. New York: Bantam Books, 1992.
Lyons, Gracie. Constructive Criticism: A Handbook. Oakland, CA: IRT Press, 1976.
Mager, Robert. Preparing Instructional Objectives. Belmont, CA: Fearon-Pitman Pub., 1975.
Maslow, Abraham. Eupsychian Management. Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1965.
—. Toward a Psychology of Being. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand, 1962.
McLaughlin, Corinne, and Gordon Davidson. Spiritual Politics:
Changing the World from the Inside Out. New York: Ballantine Books, 1994.
Milgram, Stanley. Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. New York: Harper and Row,
1974.
Postman, Neil, and Charles Weingartner. The Soft Revolution: A Student Handbook for Turning
Schools Around. New York: Delacorte Press, 1971.
———. Teaching as a Subversive Activity. New York: Delacorte Press, 1969.
Powell, John. The Secret of Staying in Love. Niles, IL: Argus Communications, 1974.
———. Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am? Chicago: Argus Communications, 1969.
Putney, Snell. The Conquest of Society: Sociological Observations for the Autonomous Revolt
against the Autosystems Which Turn Humanity into Servo-Men. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth,
1972.
Robben, John. Coming to My Senses. New York: Thomas Crowell, 1973.
Rogers, Carl. A Way of Being. New York: Houghton Mifflin Books, 1980, p. 12.
———. Carl Rogers on Personal Power. New York: Delacorte Press, 1977.
———. Freedom to Learn: A View of What Education Might Become. Columbus, OH: Charles E.
Merrill, 1969.
———. “Some Elements of Effective Interpersonal Communication.”
Mimeographed paper from speech given at California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
Nov. 9, 1964.
A Way of Being. New York: Houghton Mifflin Books, 1980, p. 12. Rosenberg, Marshall. Mutual
Education: Toward Autonomy and Interdependence. Seattle: Special Child Publications, 1972.
Ryan, William. Blaming the Victim. New York: Vintage Books, 1976.
Scheff, Thomas J., ed. Labeling Madness. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1975.
Schmookler, Andrew Bard. Out of Weakness: Healing the Wounds That Drive Us to War. New

=== PAGE 211 ===
York: Bantam Books, 1988.
Sharp, Gene. Social Power and Political Freedom. Boston: Porter Sargent, 1980.
Steiner, Claude. Scripts People Live: Transactional Analysis of Life Scripts. New York: Grove
Press, 1974.
Szasz, Thomas S. Ideology and Insanity: Essays on the Psychiatric Dehumanization of Man. New
York: M. Boyars, 1983.
Tagore, Rabindranath. Sadhana: The Realization of Life. Tucson: Omen Press, 1972.

=== PAGE 212 ===
Index
A
accountability, speech patterns that mask, 49–52, 141–42
see also responsibility action language, positive, 69
action requests, 76
advice vs. empathy, 92–93, 97–98
age role, as behavior excuse, 20
aggression, in response to blame and judgment, 148
see also judgments; violence Amtssprache, 19, 140
analyses of others, as expression of values and needs, 16, 52–54, 153,
174
see also judgments anger
NVC in Action dialogue, 154–59
responsibility for, 50, 141–43
steps to expressing, 148–49, 154
unmet needs at core of, 144–48, 153, 174–75
appreciation, 75, 185–92
approval, as motivator, 138
Arendt, Hannah, 19
Assailey, Nafez, 188–89
attention, focusing on NVC
components, 3–4, 6
autonomy, need for, 54, 153–54
B
Babble-on-ians, 121–22
“bad”/”good” labels, 17–18, 23, 130, 132
Bebermeyer, Ruth (songs), xix, 5, 27–28, 67
Becker, Ernest, 172

=== PAGE 213 ===
behavior excuses, 19–20
beliefs
about ethnic and racial groups, 150–52
about gender roles, 55–57
Bernanos, George, 21–22
blame
anger as, 50, 141–43, 174–75
as punishment, 163
self-, 49–50, 130–31
unmet needs and, 94–95, 153
see also negative messages boring conversations, 121–23
Bryson, Kelly, 121–22
Buber, Martin, 91–92, 175–76
Buechner, Frederick, 25
Building a Peace System (Irwin), 162
C
Campbell, Joseph, 100
cause vs. stimulus of feelings, 49, 141–48
celebration, need for, 54
Chardin, Teilhard de, Pierre, 170
choices, 19–21, 131, 136–40
Chuang-Tzu, 91
clinical language vs. NVC, 175–79
“cognitively arrested alternatives,” 172
comparisons as judgment, 18–19
Compassionate Communication, 3
compassion blockers, 15–23, 92–93
see 
also 
negative 
messages 
compliments, 
as 
life-alienating
communication, 185–86
consciousness, at heart of NVC, 7, 81

=== PAGE 214 ===
conscious vs. reactive responses, 3–4, 6, 153
counseling, NVC use in, 180–83
see also psychotherapy; self-counseling Croatia, 11
cultural conditioning, 171–72
D
dangerous situations, NVC use in, 117–20
Dheisheh Refugee Camp, NVC
use in, 13–14
demands
as compassion blockers, 22–23
requests vs., 79–85
depression, 71–72, 93–94, 172–73
deserve, as life-alienating concept, 22, 56, 147, 153, 162, 188
Detroit race riots of 1943, 1–2
diagnosis in psychotherapy, 175–79
docility, 21–22, 23, 171
do-nothing room, 168–69
duty, as motivator, 135–36, 139–40
E
education. See schools Eichmann, Adolf, 19
Eichmann in Jerusalem (Arendt), 19
emotional slavery/liberation, 57–60
empathy
vs. advice, 92–93, 97–98
healing power of, 113–14, 149–52
for self, 103–04, 116, 129–40
sustaining, 101–02
see also receiving empathically
Epictetus, 49

=== PAGE 215 ===
evaluations. See judgments exaggerations, 31
excuses, 19–20
expectations, 50
expressing honestly, NVC
model, 7
F
families, NVC use in, 8, 152–53
expressing anger, 154–59
personal responsibility, 20–21, 153
receiving empathically, 92, 102
recognizing demands, 22
requests, 70, 81–82
fear, as motivator, 5, 16–17, 135–36
feelings
as component of NVC
model, 6
as component of requests, 73–74, 76
cultural norms and, 98–99
expression of, 37–41, 47–48
in expressions of appreciation, 186–88
and needs, 43–46, 52–53, 132–33, 143–45
vs. non-feelings, 37–38, 41–43
responsibility for, 49–52, 141–42
sensing others’, 50, 57–58, 76, 94–96
sensing our own, 50, 133, 174–75
vocabulary lists of, 43–46
see also specific feelings
force
protective use in schools, 166–69

=== PAGE 216 ===
punitive vs. protective use of, 161–62
types of punitive use, 162–64
forgiveness, of self, 133–35
Fox, Julius, 191–93
“From Brett” (song), 84
G
Gandhi, Mahatma K., xiii–xv, 2–3, 129
gangs, NVC use with, 103–04, 115–17
Gardner, Herb, 129
gender roles, 20, 55–57
“Given To” (song), 5
giving from the heart, 1–6, 17, 52
“good”/”bad” labels, 17–18, 23, 130, 132
“The Greatest Man I Never Knew” (song), 38
Greenburg, Dan, 18
group pressure, as behavior excuse, 20
guilt, as motivator, 5, 16–17, 49–52, 80, 130–31, 135–36, 139, 142–
43
H
Hammarskjold, Dag, 103
Harvey, O.J., 17
have to, 19–22, 131, 136
heart-felt giving, 1–6, 17, 52
hierarchical societies and life-alienating communication, 23
Hillesum, Etty, 2
honesty, request for, 76–77
see also expressing honestly humility, 189–90
Humphrey, Holley, 92
I
illegitimacy, stigma of (NVC in Action dialogues), 61–64

=== PAGE 217 ===
impulses and personal responsibility, 20
institutional policy, as behavior excuse, 20
integrity, need for, 54
interdependence, need for, 54–55
internal conflict resolution, 172–73
Irwin, Robert, 162
Israelis/Palestinians, NVC use with, 11, 13–14, 53–54
“I-Thou” relationship, 175–76
J
Jesus, 193–95
Johnson, Wendell, 26
judgments
comparisons as, 18–19
compliments as, 185–86
as expressions of unmet needs, 16, 52–54, 132–35, 144–45, 153, 172–
73
moralistic vs. value, 15–18, 133
vs. observations, 26–32
as punishment, 130–31, 163–64
as self-fulfilling prophecies, 148
see also negative messages K
Keen, Sam, 184
Krishnamurti, J., 28
Kushner, Harold, 93
L
labeling, 15–18, 28
see also “good”/”bad” labels; judgments
language
evaluation-vs. observation-based, 30–31
as obscurer of feelings and needs, 19–20, 41–43, 51–52, 171–72

=== PAGE 218 ===
positive action, 69
process vs. static, 26
in psychotherapy, 175–79
of requests, 67–72
as violence promoter, 1–2, 17–18, 23
vocabulary of feeling states, 37, 43–46
life-alienating communication, 15–23, 144, 185–86
listening skills. See receiving empathically
M
Make Yourself Miserable
(Greenburg), 18
marriage, NVC use in, 8
expressing feelings, 38–39
paraphrasing, 101, 105–08
receiving empathically, 94–96
requests, 67–68, 70, 73
taking responsibility for feelings of others, 57–58
“The Mask” (poem), 36
May, Rollo, 37
McEntire, Reba, 38
medical practice, NVC use in, 10
Meir, Golda, 189
money, as motivator, 138
moralistic judgments, 15–18, 133
motivators, 52, 137–40, 165
see also guilt, as motivator mourning, 55, 132–35
N
needs
for appreciation, 190–92

=== PAGE 219 ===
as component of NVC model, 6
denial of, 55–57, 171–72
exercises in acknowledging, 65–66
in expressions of appreciation, 186–88
feelings arise from, 43–46, 52–54, 132–33, 143–45
judgments as expression of, 16, 52–54, 99, 132–35, 143–45, 153–54
list of, 54–55
sensing others’, 50, 94–96, 96, 99, 116–17
sensing our own, 50, 137, 143–45, 174
negative messages four options for hearing, 49–52, 143–44, 147
as inhibitors of communication, 39, 67–69, 148
needs underlying, 16, 52–54, 99, 116–17, 120–21
see also judgments Nigeria, 11
“no,” hearing with empathy, 120–21
non-feelings vs. feelings, 37–38
non-specific language, in requests, 67–74
nonviolence, defined, 2–3
NVC (Nonviolent
Communication) basics, 3–7, 81, 94
NVC in Action dialogues overview, 12
counseling others, 180–83
Dheisheh Refugee Camp, 13–14
dying man and wife, 105–08
father-son conflict, 154–59
“most arrogant speaker”
message, 32–33
request of smoker friend, 85–87
teen pregnancy issue, 61–64
NVC model, 6–8, 172–73

=== PAGE 220 ===
O
obligation, 135–36, 139–40
obnoxious stage, 59–60
observation without evaluating compared to evaluative observation,
26–32
as component of NVC model, 6, 172
exercises, 34–35
NVC in Action dialogue, 32–33
“One day a man named Jesus …”
(song), 194–95
options, when receiving negative messages, 49–52, 143–44, 147
P
Palestinians/Israelis, NVC use with, 11, 13–14, 53–54
paraphrasing, 13–14, 96–101, 105–08
permissiveness vs. NVC, 166
personal relationships, NVC use in, 8, 152–53
expressing feelings, 38–39
paraphrasing, 97–98, 101, 105–08
receiving empathically, 94–96
requests, 67–68, 70, 73, 85–87
taking responsibility for feelings of others, 57–58
see also families, NVC use in personal responsibility denial of, 19–22
for feelings, 49–52, 141–43, 145, 147
physical nurturance, need for, 55
playfulness, 54–55, 135–36, 140
poems. See song lyrics/poems polka-dotted suit lesson, 134–35
positive action language, 69
Powell, John, 191
power issues, 115
praise, as life-alienating communication, 185–86

=== PAGE 221 ===
presence, quality of, 91–92
prisons, NVC use in, 145–47
process language, 26
protective force, 161–62, 166–69
psychotherapy, and role of therapist, 93–94, 123–27, 175–79
punishment
assumptions underlying, 17–18, 162
avoidance, as motivation, 139
costs and limitations of, 164–66
and reward, 22–23
self-, 130–31, 133
types, 162–64
punitive force, 17–18, 22–23, 161–66
Q
question format
for paraphrasing, 96–98
for reflection requests, 74–76
R
racial issues, NVC to resolve, 40–41, 68–69, 77–79, 149, 150–52
reactive vs. conscious responses, 3–4, 6, 153
reassurance vs. empathy, 92
receiving empathically (listening skills)
basics, 7, 91–96
for boring conversations, 121–23
exercises, 109–11
NVC in Action dialogues, 13–14, 32–33, 61–64, 105–08
obstacles, 92–93
paraphrasing, 13–14, 96–101, 105–08
to response of silence, 123–27

=== PAGE 222 ===
self-empathy and, 103–04, 116, 132–34
sustaining, 101–02
in violent situations, 117–20
when angry, 143–44, 149–52
when hearing rejection, 80–81, 120–21
reflection
paraphrasing as, 96
requests for, 74–76
regret, 133–34
relationships. See personal relationships
religions in conflict, NVC as resource for, 11
requests
as component of NVC
model, 6
conscious formulation, 72–74
and demands compared, 79–85
exercises in expressing, 88–89
of a group, 77–79
for honesty, 76–77
NVC in Action dialogue, 85–87
for a reflection, 74–76, 151–52
wording of, 67–72
responsibility
for feelings of others, 57–60
for self, 19–22, 49–52, 141–43, 145, 147
The Revolution in Psychiatry
(Becker), 172
reward and punishment, 22–23
rewards, as motivator, 138

=== PAGE 223 ===
road rage, 174–75
Rogers, Carl, 113, 175–76
rules and personal responsibility, 20
Rumi, 15
Rwanda, 11
S
schools, NVC use in, 9
observation without evaluation, 28–30
positive action requests, 68–69
protective use of force, 166–69
receiving empathically, 113–14
reflection requests, 75
requests vs. demands, 82–83
taking personal responsibility, 20–21
The Secret of Staying in Love
(Powell), 191
self-blame, 49–50, 130–31
self-compassion, 103–04, 116, 129–40
self-counseling with NVC, 171–73
see also self-compassion self-esteem
effect of punitive force on, 164
effects of judgment on, 16–17, 49–50
and use of NVC, 5
self-forgiveness, 133–35
self-fulfilling prophecies, 148
sexual expression, need for, 55
shame, 5, 16–17, 130–31, 135–36, 139
should, 131, 139–40, 172–73
Sierra Leone, 11

=== PAGE 224 ===
silence, responding to, 38–41, 123–27
social roles, as behavior excuse, 20
song lyrics/poems “Given To,” 5
“The Greatest Man I Never Knew,” 38
“The Mask,” 36
about negative requests, 67
about observation and evaluation, 25, 27–28
“One day a man named Jesus …,” 194–95
about requests vs. demands, 84
“Words Are Windows,” xix spiritual communion, need for, 55
static language, 26
stigma of illegitimacy, NVC in Action dialogues, 61–64
stimulus vs. cause of feelings, 49, 141–48
street gangs, NVC use with, 103–04, 115–17
T
taking our time with NVC, 152–54
television, and violence, 17–18
therapy. See psychotherapy thoughts
as anger generator, 143
vs. feelings, 41–43
request for, 76–77
A Thousand Clowns (Gardner), 129
U
unmet needs, judgments as expression of, 16, 52–54, 99, 132–35, 143–
48, 153–54
V
value judgments, 17–18
violence
diffusion with NVC, 117–20
and language, 2–3, 17–18, 23

=== PAGE 225 ===
as response to judgments and blame, 144, 148
self-directed, 129–32
see also life-alienating communication
vulnerability, 18, 40–41, 115–17
W
Weil, Simone, 92
When Bad Things Happen to
Good People (Kushner), 93
Williamson, Marianne, 189–90
women, and denial of personal needs, 55–57
“Words Are Windows” (song), xix workplace, NVC use in, 9–10
expressing feelings, 39–40
paraphrasing, 100
receiving empathically, 61–64
requests, 70–71

=== PAGE 226 ===
The Four-Part Nonviolent Communication
Process            
Clearly expressing
how I am
without blaming
or criticizing
Empathically receiving
how you are
without hearing
blame or criticism
OBSERVATIONS
1. What I observe (see, hear, remember,
imagine, free from my evaluations) that
does or does not contribute to my well-
being:
“When I (see, hear) … ”
1. What you observe (see, hear, remember,
imagine, free from your evaluations) that
does or does not contribute to your well-
being:
“When you see/hear … ”
(Sometimes unspoken when offering
empathy)
FEELINGS
2. How I feel (emotion or sensation rather
than thought) in relation to what I
observe:
“I feel … ”
2. How you feel (emotion or sensation
rather than thought) in relation to what
you observe:
“You feel …”
NEEDS
3. What I need or value (rather than a
preference, or a specific action) that causes
my feelings:
3. What you need or value (rather than a
preference, or a specific action) that causes
your feelings:

=== PAGE 227 ===
“ … because I need/value … ”
“ … because you need/value …”
Clearly requesting that which would
enrich my life without demanding
Empathically receiving that which would
enrich your life without hearing any
demand
REQUESTS
4. The concrete actions I would like
taken:
“Would you be willing to … ?”
4. The concrete actions you would like
taken:
“Would you like … ?”
(Sometimes unspoken when offering
empathy)
© Marshall B. Rosenberg. For more information about Marshall B. Rosenberg
or the Center for Nonviolent Communication, please visit www.CNVC.org.

=== PAGE 228 ===
Some Basic Feelings We All Have Feelings when needs
are fulfilled
• Amazed
• Comfortable
• Confident
• Eager
• Energetic
• Fulfilled
• Glad
• Hopeful
• Inspired
• Intrigued
• Joyous
• Moved
• Optimistic
• Proud
• Relieved
• Stimulated
• Surprised
• Thankful
• Touched
• Trustful
Feelings when needs are not fulfilled
• Angry
• Annoyed
• Concerned
• Confused

=== PAGE 229 ===
• Disappointed • Discouraged
• Distressed
• Embarrassed
• Frustrated
• Helpless
• Hopeless
• Impatient
• Irritated
• Lonely
• Nervous
• Overwhelmed
• Puzzled
• Reluctant
• Sad
• Uncomfortable 
Some Basic Needs We All Have Autonomy
• Choosing dreams/goals/values Choosing dreams/goals/values Choosing dreams/goals/values •
Choosing plans for fulfilling one’s dreams, goals, values Celebration
• Celebrating the creation of life and dreams fulfilled • Celebrating losses: loved ones, dreams, etc.
(mourning) Integrity
• Authenticity • Creativity
• Meaning
• Self-worth
Interdependence
• Acceptance
• Appreciation
• Closeness
• Community

=== PAGE 230 ===
• Consideration • Contribution to the enrichment of life • Emotional Safety • Empathy
• Honesty (the empowering honesty that enables us to learn from our limitations) • Love
• Reassurance
• Respect
• Support
• Trust
• Understanding Physical Nurturance
• Air
• Food
• Movement, exercise • Protection from life-threatening forms of life: viruses, bacteria, insects,
predatory animals • Rest
• Sexual Expression • Shelter
• Touch
• Water
Play
• Fun
• Laughter
Spiritual Communion
• Beauty
• Harmony
• Inspiration
• Order
• Peace
© CNVC. Please visit www.cnvc.org to learn more.

