=== PAGE 69 ===
CHAPTER FIVE

=== PAGE 70 ===
Taking Responsibility for Our Feelings
“People are disturbed not by things, but by the view they take of them.”
—Epictetus
Hearing a Negative Message: Four Options
The third component of NVC entails the acknowledgment of the root of
our feelings. NVC heightens our awareness that what others say and do
may be the stimulus, but never the cause, of our feelings. We see that our
feelings result from how we choose to receive what others say and do, as
well as from our particular needs and expectations in that moment. With
this third component, we are led to accept responsibility for what we do
to generate our own feelings.
What others do may be the stimulus of our feelings, but not the cause.
When someone gives us a negative message, whether verbally or
nonverbally, we have four options as to how to receive it. One option is
to take it personally by hearing blame and criticism. For example,
someone is angry and says, “You’re the most self-centered person I’ve
ever met!” If choosing to take it personally, we might react: “Oh, I
should’ve been more sensitive!” We accept the other person’s judgment
and blame ourselves. We choose this option at great cost to our self-
esteem, for it inclines us toward feelings of guilt, shame, and depression.
Four options for receiving negative messages:
1. blame ourselves.
A second option is to fault the speaker. For example, in
response to “You’re the most self-centered person I’ve ever met,” we
might protest: “You have no right to say that! I am always considering
your needs.
2. blame others.
You’re the one who is really self-centered.”

=== PAGE 71 ===
When we receive messages this way, and blame the speaker, we are
likely to feel anger.
When receiving negative messages, our third option would be to shine
the light of consciousness on our own feelings and needs.
Thus, we might reply, “When I hear you say that I am the most self-
centered person
you’ve ever met, I feel hurt, because I need some recognition of my
efforts to be considerate of your preferences.” By focusing attention on
our own feelings and needs, we become conscious that our current
feeling of hurt derives from a need for our efforts to be recognized.
3. sense our own feelings and needs.
Finally, a fourth option on receiving a negative message is to shine the
light of consciousness on the other person’s feelings and needs as they
are currently expressed. We might for example ask, “Are you feeling hurt
because you need more consideration for your preferences?”
4. sense others’ feelings and needs.
We accept responsibility for our feelings, rather than blame other
people, by acknowledging our own needs, desires, expectations, values,
or thoughts. Note the difference between the following expressions of
disappointment:
Example 1
A: “You disappointed me by not coming over last evening.”
B: “I was disappointed when you didn’t come over, because I wanted to talk over some things
that were bothering me.”
Speaker A attributes responsibility for his disappointment solely to
another person’s action. Speaker B traces his feeling of disappointment
to his own unfulfilled desire.
Example 2
A: “Their cancelling the contract really irritated me!”
B: “When they cancelled the contract, I felt really irritated because I was thinking to myself
that it was an awfully irresponsible thing to do.”

=== PAGE 72 ===
Speaker A attributes her irritation solely to the behavior of the other
party, whereas Speaker B accepts responsibility for her feeling by
acknowledging the thought behind it. She recognizes that her blaming
way of thinking has generated her irritation. In NVC, however, we would
urge this speaker to go a step further by identifying what she is wanting:
what need, desire, expectation, hope, or value of hers has not been
fulfilled? As we shall see, the more we are able to connect our feelings to
our own needs, the easier it is for others to respond compassionately. To
relate her feelings to what she is wanting, Speaker B might have said:
“When they cancelled the contract, I felt really irritated because I was
hoping for an opportunity to rehire the workers we laid off last year.”
It is helpful to recognize a number of common speech patterns that
tend to mask accountability for our own feelings:
1. Use of impersonal pronouns such as it and that: “It really
infuriates me when spelling mistakes appear in our public
brochures.” “That bugs me a lot.”
2. 2.The use of the expression “I feel (an emotion) because …
“ followed by a person or personal pronoun other than I: “I
feel hurt because you said you don’t love me.” “I feel angry
because the supervisor broke her promise.”
3. Statements that mention only the actions of others: “When
you don’t call me on my birthday, I feel hurt.” “Mommy is
disappointed when you don’t finish your food.”
Connect your feeling with your need: “I feel … because I need …”
In each of these instances, we can deepen our awareness of our own
responsibility by substituting the phrase, “I feel … because I … “ For
example:
1. “I feel really infuriated when spelling mistakes like that
appear in our public brochures, because I want our
company to project a professional image.”
2. “I feel angry that the supervisor broke her promise, because
I was counting on getting that long weekend to visit my
brother.”

=== PAGE 73 ===
3. “Mommy feels disappointed when you don’t finish your
food, because I want you to grow up strong and healthy.”
Distinguish between giving from the heart and being motivated by
guilt.
The basic mechanism of motivating by guilt is to attribute the
responsibility for one’s own feelings to others. When parents say, “It
hurts Mommy and Daddy when you get poor grades at school,” they are
implying that the child’s actions are the cause of the parents’ happiness
or unhappiness. On the surface, taking responsibility for the feelings of
others can easily be mistaken for positive caring. It may appear that the
child cares for the parent and feels bad because the parent is suffering.
However, if children who assume this kind of responsibility change their
behavior in accordance with parental wishes, they are not acting from
the heart, but acting to avoid guilt.
The Needs at the Roots of Feelings
Judgments, criticisms, diagnoses, and interpretations of others are all
alienated expressions of our needs. If someone says, “You never
understand me,” they are really telling us that their need to be
understood is not being fulfilled. If a wife says, “You’ve been working
late every night this week; you love your work more than you love me,”
she is saying that her need for intimacy is not being met.
Judgments of others are alienated expressions of our own unmet
needs.
When we express our needs indirectly through the use of evaluations,
interpretations, and images, others are likely to hear criticism. And when
people hear anything that sounds like criticism, they tend to invest their
energy in self-defense or counterattack. If we wish for a compassionate
response from others, it is self-defeating to express our needs by
interpreting or diagnosing their behavior. Instead, the more directly we
can connect our feelings to our own needs, the easier it is for others to
respond to us compassionately.

=== PAGE 74 ===
If we express our needs, we have a better chance of getting them met.
Unfortunately, most of us have never been taught to think in terms of
needs. We are accustomed to thinking about what’s wrong with other
people when our needs aren’t being fulfilled. Thus, if we want coats to
be hung up in the closet, we may characterize our children as lazy for
leaving them on the couch. Or we may interpret our co-workers as
irresponsible when they don’t go about their tasks the way we would
prefer them to.
I was once invited to Southern California to mediate between some
landowners and migrant farm workers whose conflicts had grown
increasingly hostile and violent. I began the meeting by asking these two
questions: “What is it that you are each needing? And what would you
like to request of the other in relation to these needs?”
“The problem is that these people are racist!” shouted a farm worker.
“The problem is that these people don’t respect law and order!” shouted
a landowner even more loudly. As is often the case, these groups were
more skilled in analyzing the perceived wrongness of others than in
clearly expressing their own needs.
In a comparable situation, I once met with a group of Israelis and
Palestinians who wanted to establish the mutual trust necessary to bring
peace to their homelands. I opened the session with the same questions,
“What is it you are needing and what would you like to request from one
another in relation to those needs?” Instead of directly stating his needs,
a Palestinian mukhtar (who is
like a village mayor) answered, “You people are acting like a bunch of
Nazis.” A statement like that is not likely to get the cooperation of a
group of Israelis! Almost immediately, an Israeli woman jumped up and
countered, “Mukhtar, that was a totally insensitive thing for you to say!”
Here were people who had come together to build trust and harmony,
but after only one interchange, matters were worse than before they
began. This happens often when people are used to analyzing and
blaming one another rather than clearly expressing what they need. In
this case, the woman could have responded to the mukhtar in terms of
her own needs and requests by saying, for example, “I am needing more

=== PAGE 75 ===
respect in our dialogue. Instead of telling us how you think we are
acting, would you tell us what it is we are doing that you find
disturbing?”
It has been my experience over and over again that from the moment
people begin talking about what they need rather than what’s wrong
with one another, the possibility of finding ways to meet everybody’s
needs is greatly increased. The following are some of the basic human
needs we all share:
Autonomy
to choose one’s dreams, goals, values
to choose one’s plan for fulfilling one’s dreams, goals,
values
Celebration
to celebrate the creation of life and dreams fulfilled
to celebrate losses: loved ones, dreams, etc. (mourning)
Integrity
authenticity
creativity
meaning
self-worth
Interdependence
acceptance
appreciation
closeness
community
consideration
contribution to the enrichment of life (to exercise one’s
power by giving that which contributes to life)
Interdependence (continued)

=== PAGE 76 ===
emotional safety
empathy
honesty (the empowering honesty that enables us to learn
from our limitations)
love
reassurance
respect
support
trust
understanding
warmth
Play
fun
laughter
Spiritual Communion
beauty
harmony
inspiration
order
peace
Physical Nurturance
air
food
movement, exercise
protection from life-threatening forms of life: viruses,
bacteria, insects, predatory animals
rest
sexual expression
shelter
touch
water

=== PAGE 77 ===
The Pain of Expressing Our Needs versus the Pain of Not Expressing
Our Needs
In a world where we’re often judged harshly for identifying and
revealing our needs, doing so can be very frightening. Women, in
particular, are susceptible to criticism. For centuries, the image of the
loving woman has been associated with sacrifice and the denial of one’s
own needs to take care of others. Because women are socialized to view
the caretaking of others as their highest duty, they often learn to ignore
their own needs.
At one workshop, we discussed what happens to women who
internalize such beliefs. These women, if they ask for what they want,
will often do so in a way that both reflects and reinforces the beliefs that
they have no genuine right to their needs and that their needs are
unimportant. For example, because she is fearful of asking for what she
needs, a woman may fail to simply say that she’s had a busy day, is
feeling tired, and wants some time in the evening to herself; instead, her
words come out sounding like a legal case: “You know I haven’t had a
moment to myself all day. I ironed all the shirts, did the whole week’s
laundry, took the dog to the vet, made dinner, packed the lunches, and
called all the neighbors about the block meeting, so [imploringly] … so
how about if you … ?”
If we don’t value our needs, others may not either.
“No!” comes the swift response. Her plaintive request elicits resistance
rather than compassion from her listeners. They have difficulty hearing
and valuing the needs behind her pleas, and furthermore react
negatively to her weak attempt to argue from a position of what she
“should” get or “deserves” to get from them. In the end the speaker is
again persuaded that her needs don’t matter, not realizing that they were
expressed in a way unlikely to draw a positive response.
My mother was once at a workshop where other women were
discussing how frightening it was to be expressing their needs. Suddenly
she got up and left the room, and didn’t return for a long time. She
finally reappeared, looking very pale. In the presence of the group, I
asked,

=== PAGE 78 ===
“Mother, are you all right?”
“Yes,” she answered, “but I just had a sudden realization that’s very
hard for me to take in.”
“What’s that?”
“I’ve just become aware that for thirty-six years, I was angry with your
father for not meeting my needs, and now I realize that I never once
clearly told him what I needed.”
My mother’s revelation was accurate. Not one time, that I can
remember, did she clearly express her needs to my father. She’d hint
around and go through all kinds of convolutions, but never would she
ask directly for what she needed.
We tried to understand why it was so hard for her to have done so. My
mother grew up in an economically impoverished family. She recalled
asking for things as a child and being admonished by her brothers and
sisters, “You shouldn’t ask for that! You know we’re poor. Do you think
you are the only person in the family?” Eventually she grew to fear that
asking for what she needed would only lead to disapproval and
judgment.
She related a childhood anecdote about one of her sisters who had had
an appendix operation and afterwards had been given a beautiful little
purse by another sister. My mother was fourteen at the time. Oh, how
she yearned to have an exquisitely beaded purse like her sister’s, but she
dared not open her mouth. So guess what? She feigned a pain in her side
and went the whole way with her story. Her family took her to several
doctors. They were unable to produce a diagnosis and so opted for
exploratory surgery. It had been a bold gamble on my mother’s part, but
it worked—she was given an identical little purse! When she received
the coveted purse, my mother was elated despite being in physical agony
from the surgery. Two nurses came in and one stuck a thermometer in
her mouth. My mother said, “Ummm, ummm,” to show the purse to the
second nurse, who answered, “Oh, for me? Why, thank you!” and took
the purse! My mother was at a loss, and never figured out how to say, “I
didn’t mean to give it to you. Please return it to me.” Her story
poignantly reveals how painful it can be when people don’t openly
acknowledge their needs.

=== PAGE 79 ===
From Emotional Slavery to Emotional Liberation
In our development toward a state of emotional liberation, most of us
experience three stages in the way we relate to others.
Stage 1: In this stage, which I refer to as emotional slavery, we believe
ourselves responsible for the feelings of others. We think we must
constantly strive to keep everyone happy. If they don’t appear happy, we
feel responsible and compelled to do something about it. This can easily
lead us to see the very people who are closest to us as burdens.
Taking responsibility for the feelings of others can be very detrimental
to intimate relationships. I routinely hear variations on the following
theme: “I’m really scared to be in a relationship.
First stage: Emotional slavery. We see ourselves responsible for others’
feelings.
Every time I see my partner in pain or needing something, I feel
overwhelmed. I feel like I’m in prison, that I’m being smothered—and I
just have to get out of the relationship as fast as possible.” This response
is common among those who experience love as denial of one’s own
needs in order to attend to the needs of the beloved.
In the early days of a relationship, partners typically relate joyfully
and compassionately to each other out of a sense of freedom. The
relationship is exhilarating, spontaneous, wonderful. Eventually,
however, as the relationship becomes “serious,” partners may begin to
assume responsibility for each other’s feelings.
If I were a partner who is conscious of doing this, I might
acknowledge the situation by explaining, “I can’t bear it when I lose
myself in relationships. When I see my partner’s pain, I lose me, and
then I just have to break free.” However, if I have not reached this level
of awareness, I am likely to blame my partner for the deterioration of
the relationship. Thus I might say, “My partner is so needy and
dependent it’s really stressing out our relationship.”
In such a case, my partner would do well to reject the notion that
there is anything wrong with her needs. It would only make a bad
situation worse to accept that blame. Instead, she could offer an
empathic response to the pain of my emotional slavery: “So you find

=== PAGE 80 ===
yourself in panic. It’s very hard for you to hold on to the deep caring and
love we’ve had without turning it into a responsibility, duty,
obligation…. You sense your freedom closing down because you think
you constantly have to take care of me.” If, however, instead of an
empathic response, she says, “Are you feeling tense because I have been
making too many demands on you?” then both of us are likely to stay
enmeshed in emotional slavery, making it that much more difficult for
the relationship to survive.
Stage 2: In this stage, we become aware of the high costs of assuming
responsibility for others’ feelings and trying to accommodate them at our
own expense. When we notice how much of our lives we’ve missed and
how little we have responded to the call of our own soul, we may get
angry. I refer jokingly to this stage as the obnoxious stage because we
tend toward obnoxious comments like, “That’s your problem! I’m not
responsible for your feelings!” when presented with another person’s
pain. We are clear what we are not responsible for, but have yet to learn
how to be responsible to others in a way that is not emotionally
enslaving.
Second stage: The obnoxious stage. We feel angry; we no longer want
to be responsible for others’ feelings.
As we emerge from the stage of emotional slavery, we may continue to
carry remnants of fear and guilt around having our own needs. Thus it is
not surprising that we end up expressing our needs in ways that sound
rigid and unyielding to the ears of others. For example, during a break in
one of my workshops, a young woman expressed appreciation for the
insights she’d gained into her own state of emotional enslavement. When
the workshop resumed, I suggested an activity to the group. The same
young woman then declared assertively, “I’d rather do something else.” I
sensed she was exercising her newfound right to express her needs—
even if they ran counter to those of others.
To encourage her to sort out what she wanted, I asked, “Do you want
to do something else even if it conflicts with my needs?” She thought for
a moment, and then stammered, “Yes…. er … I mean, no.” Her
confusion reflects how, in the obnoxious stage, we have yet to grasp that
emotional liberation entails more than simply asserting our own needs.

=== PAGE 81 ===
I recall an incident during my daughter Marla’s passage toward
emotional liberation. She had always been the “perfect little girl” who
denied her own needs to comply with the wishes of others. When I
became aware of how frequently she suppressed her own desires in order
to please others, I talked to her about how I’d enjoy hearing her express
her needs more often. When we first broached the subject, Marla cried.
“But, Daddy, I don’t want to disappoint anybody!” she protested
helplessly. I tried to show Marla how her honesty would be a gift more
precious to others
than accommodating them to prevent their upset. I also clarified ways
she could empathize with people when they were upset without taking
responsibility for their feelings.
A short time later, I saw evidence that my daughter was beginning to
express her needs more openly. A call came from her school principal,
apparently disturbed by a communication he’d had with Marla, who had
arrived at school wearing overalls. “Marla,” he’d said, “young women do
not dress this way.” To which Marla had responded, “Bug off!”
Hearing this was cause for celebration: Marla had graduated from
emotional slavery to obnoxiousness! She was learning to express her
needs and risk dealing with the displeasure of others. Surely she had yet
to assert her needs comfortably and in a way that respected the needs of
others, but I trusted this would occur in time. Stage 3: At the third stage,
emotional liberation, we respond to the needs of others out of compassion,
never out of fear, guilt, or shame. Our actions are therefore fulfilling to
us, as well as to those who receive our efforts. We accept full
responsibility for our own intentions and actions, but not for the feelings
of others. At this stage, we are aware that we can never meet our own
needs at the expense of others. Emotional liberation involves stating
clearly what we need in a way that communicates we are equally
concerned that the needs of others be fulfilled. NVC is designed to
support us in relating at this level.
Third stage: Emotional liberation. We take responsibility for our
intentions and actions.
Summary

=== PAGE 82 ===
The third component of NVC is the acknowledgment of the needs
behind our feelings. What others say and do may be the stimulus for, but
never the cause of, our feelings. When someone communicates
negatively, we have four options as to how to receive the message: (1)
blame ourselves, (2) blame others, (3) sense our own feelings and needs,
(4) sense the feelings and needs hidden in the other person’s negative
message.
Judgments, criticisms, diagnoses, and interpretations of others are all
alienated expressions of our own needs and values. When others hear
criticism, they tend to invest their energy in self-defense or
counterattack. The more directly we can connect our feelings to our
needs, the easier it is for others to respond compassionately.
In a world where we are often harshly judged for identifying and
revealing our needs, doing so can be very frightening, especially for
women who are socialized to ignore their own needs while caring for
others.
In the course of developing emotional responsibility, most of us
experience three stages: (1) “emotional slavery”—believing ourselves
responsible for the feelings of others, (2) “the obnoxious stage”—in
which we refuse to admit to caring what anyone else feels or needs, and
(3) “emotional liberation”—in which we accept full responsibility for our
own feelings but not the feelings of others, while being aware that we
can never meet our own needs at the expense of others.
NVC in Action
“Bring Back the Stigma of Illegitimacy!”
A student of Nonviolent Communication volunteering at a food bank was shocked
when an elderly co-worker burst out from behind a newspaper, “What we need to
do in this country is bring back the stigma of illegitimacy!”
The student’s habitual reaction to this kind of statement would have been to say
nothing, to judge the other severely but silently, and eventually to process her own
feelings safely away from the scene. This time, she remembered she had the option
of listening for the feelings and needs behind the words that had shocked her.
Student: (first checking out her guess as to what the co-worker was observing) Are you

=== PAGE 83 ===
reading something about teenage pregnancies in the paper?
Co-worker: Yes, it’s unbelievable how many of them are doing it!
Student: (now listening for the co-worker’s feeling, and what unmet need might be
giving rise to this feeling) Are you feeling alarmed because you’d like
kids to have stable families?
Co-worker: Of course! Do you know, my father would have killed me if I had done
anything like that!
Student: So you’re remembering how it was for the girls in your generation who
got pregnant?
Co-worker: Sure thing! We knew what would happen to us if we got pregnant. We
were scared about it all the time, not like these girls nowadays.
Student: Are you annoyed that there is no fear of punishment for the girls who get
pregnant these days?
Co-worker: Well, at least fear and punishment worked! It says here that there are
girls sleeping around with different men just so they can get pregnant!
That’s right! They have babies and the rest of us in society pay for it!
The student of NVC heard two different feelings in this statement: astonishment
that girls would deliberately get pregnant, and annoyance that taxpayers end up
paying for children born in this way. She chose which feeling to empathize with.
Student: Are you astonished to realize that people are getting pregnant these days
without any consideration for reputation, consequences, financial
stability … all the things you used to consider? Co-worker: Yeah, and
guess who ends up paying for it?
The co-worker, probably feeling heard around her astonishment, moved on to her
other feeling: that of annoyance. As often happens when there is a mixture of
feelings present, the speaker will return to those that have not received empathic
attention. It is not necessary for the listener to reflect back a complex mixture of
feelings all at once; the flow of compassion will continue as each feeling comes up
again in its turn.
Student: Sounds like you’re exasperated because you’d like your tax money to be
used for other purposes. Is that so?
Co-worker: Certainly is! Do you know that my son and his wife want a second
child and they can’t have one—even though they have two jobs—

=== PAGE 84 ===
because it costs so much?
Student: I guess you’re sad about that? You’d probably love to have a second
grandchild …
Co-worker: Yes, and it’s not just for me that it would make a difference.
Student: … and for your son to have the family he wants … (Even though the
student guessed only partially correctly, she did not interrupt the flow of
empathy, instead allowing the co-worker to continue and realize another
concern.)
Co-worker: Yes, I think it’s sad to be a single child too.
Student: Oh, I see; you’d like for Katie to have a little brother?
Co-worker: That would be nice.
At this point, the student sensed a release in her co-worker. A moment of silence
elapsed. She felt surprised to discover that, while she still wanted to express her
own views, her urgency and tension had dissipated because she no longer felt
“adversarial.” She understood the feelings and needs behind her co-worker’s
statements and no longer felt that the two of them were “worlds apart.”
Student: (expressing herself in NVC, and using all four parts of the process: observation
[O], feeling [F], need [N], request [R]) You know, when you first said
that we should bring back the stigma of illegitimacy (O), I got really
scared (F), because it really matters to me that all of us here share a
deep caring for people needing help (N). Some of the people coming
here for food are teenage parents (O), and I want to make sure they
feel welcome (N). Would you mind telling me how you feel when you
see Dashal, or Amy and her boyfriend, walking in? (R)
The dialogue continued with several more exchanges until the woman got the
reassurance she needed that her co-worker did indeed offer caring and respectful
help to unmarried teen clients. Even more importantly, what the woman gained
was a new experience in expressing disagreement in a way that met her needs for
honesty and mutual respect.
In the meantime, the co-worker left satisfied that her concerns around teen
pregnancy had been fully heard. Both parties felt understood, and their relationship
benefited from their having shared their understanding and differences without
hostility. In the absence of NVC, their relationship might have begun to deteriorate
from this moment, and the work they both wanted to do in common—helping

=== PAGE 85 ===
people-might have suffered.
Exercise 3
ACKNOWLEDGING NEEDS
To practice identifying needs, please circle the number in front of each
statement where the speaker is acknowledging responsibility for his or
her feelings.
1. “You irritate me when you leave company documents on
the conference room floor.”
2. “I feel angry when you say that, because I am wanting
respect and I hear your words as an insult.”
3. “I feel frustrated when you come late.”
4. “I’m sad that you won’t be coming for dinner because I was
hoping we could spend the evening together.”
5. “I feel disappointed because you said you would do it and
you didn’t.”
6. “I’m discouraged because I would have liked to have
progressed further in my work by now.”
7. “Little things people say sometimes hurt me.”
8. “I feel happy that you received that award.”
9. “I feel scared when you raise your voice.”
10. “I am grateful that you offered me a ride because I was
needing to get home before my children arrive.”
Here are my responses for Exercise 3:
1. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the statement implies that the other person’s behavior is
solely responsible for the speaker’s feelings. It doesn’t
reveal the needs or thoughts that are contributing to the
speaker’s feelings. To do so, the speaker might have said,
“I’m irritated when you leave company documents on the
conference room floor, because I want our documents to be
safely stored and accessible.”
2. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that the
speaker is acknowledging responsibility for his or her

=== PAGE 86 ===
feelings.
3. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To
express the needs or thoughts underlying his or her
feelings, the speaker might have said, “I feel frustrated
when you come late because I was hoping we’d be able to
get some front-row seats.”
4. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that the
speaker is acknowledging responsibility for his or her
feelings.
5. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To
express the needs and thoughts underlying his or her
feelings, the speaker might have said, “When you said
you’d do it and then didn’t, I felt disappointed because I
want to be able to rely upon your words.”
6. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that the
speaker is acknowledging responsibility for his or her
feelings.
7. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To
express the needs and thoughts underlying his or her
feelings, the speaker might have said, “Sometimes when
people say little things, I feel hurt because I want to be
appreciated, not criticized.”
8. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To
express the needs and thoughts underlying his or her
feelings, the speaker might have said, “When you received
that award, I felt happy because I was hoping you’d be
recognized for all the work you’d put into the project.”
9. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To
express the needs and thoughts underlying his or her
feelings, the speaker might have said, “When you raise
your voice, I feel scared because I’m telling myself
someone might get hurt here, and I need to know that
we’re all safe.”
10. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that the
speaker is acknowledging responsibility for his or her
feelings.

=== PAGE 87 ===
W
CHAPTER SIX
Requesting That Which Would Enrich Life
e have now covered the first three components of NVC, which
address what we are observing, feeling, and needing. We have learned
to do this without criticizing, analyzing, blaming, or diagnosing others,
and in a way likely to inspire compassion. The fourth and final
component of this process addresses what we would like to request of
others in order to enrich life for us. When our needs are not being
fulfilled, we follow the expression of what we are observing, feeling, and
needing with a specific request: we ask for actions that might fulfill our
needs. How do we express our requests so that others are more willing to
respond compassionately to our needs?
Using Positive Action Language
First of all, we express what we are requesting rather than what we are
not requesting. “How do you do a don’t?” goes a line of a children’s song
by my colleague Ruth Bebermeyer: “All I know is I feel won’t when I’m
told to do a don’t.” These lyrics reveal two problems commonly
encountered when requests are worded in the negative. People are often
confused as to what is actually being requested, and furthermore,
negative requests are likely to provoke resistance.
Use positive language when making requests.
A woman at a workshop, frustrated that her husband was spending so
much time at work, described how her request had
backfired: “I asked him not to spend so much time at work. Three
weeks later, he responded by announcing that he’d signed up for a golf
tournament!” She had successfully communicated to him what she did
not want—his spending so much time at work—but had failed to request
what she did want. Encouraged to reword her request, she thought a
minute and said, “I wish I had told him that I would like him to spend at

=== PAGE 88 ===
least one evening a week at home with the children and me.”
During the Vietnam War, I was asked to debate the war issue on
television with a man whose position differed from mine. The show was
videotaped, so I was able to watch it at home that evening. When I saw
myself on the screen communicating in ways I didn’t want to be
communicating, I felt very upset. “If I’m ever in another discussion,” I
told myself, “I am determined not to do what I did on that program! I’m
not going to be defensive. I’m not going to let them make a fool of me.”
Notice how I spoke to myself in terms of what I didn’t want to do rather
than in terms of what I did want to do.
A chance to redeem myself came the very next week when I was
invited to continue the debate on the same program. All the way to the
studio, I repeated to myself all the things I didn’t want to do. As soon as
the program started, the man launched off in exactly the same way he
had a week earlier. For about ten seconds after he’d finished talking, I
managed not to communicate in the ways I had been reminding myself.
In fact, I said nothing. I just sat there. As soon as I opened my mouth,
however, I found words tumbling out in all the ways I had been so
determined to avoid! It was a painful lesson about what can happen
when I only identify what I don’t want to do, without clarifying what I
do want to do.
I was once invited to work with some high school students who
suffered a long litany of grievances against their principal. They
regarded the principal as racist, and searched for ways to get even with
him. A minister who worked closely with the young people became
deeply concerned over the prospect of violence. Out of respect for the
minister, the students agreed to meet with me.
They began by describing what they saw as discrimination on
the part of the principal. After listening to several of their charges, I
suggested that they proceed by clarifying what they wanted from the
principal.
“What good would that do?” scoffed one student in disgust. “We
already went to him to tell him what we wanted. His answer to us was,
‘Get out of here! I don’t need you people telling me what to do!’”
I asked the students what they had requested of the principal. They

=== PAGE 89 ===
recalled saying to him that they didn’t want him telling them how to
wear their hair. I suggested that they might have received a more
cooperative response if they had expressed what they did, rather than
what they did not, want. They had then informed the principal that they
wanted to be treated with fairness, at which he had become defensive,
vociferously denying ever having been unfair. I ventured to guess that
the principal would have responded more favorably if they had asked for
specific actions rather than vague behavior like “fair treatment.”
Working together, we found ways to express their requests in positive
action language. At the end of the meeting, the students had clarified
thirty-eight actions they wanted the principal to take, including “We’d
like you to agree to black student representation on decisions made
about dress code,” and “We’d like you to refer to us as ‘black students’
and not ‘you people.’” The following day, the students presented their
requests to the principal using the positive action language we had
practiced; that evening I received an elated phone call from them: their
principal had agreed to all thirty-eight requests!
In addition to using positive language, we also want to word our
requests in the form of concrete actions that others can undertake and to
avoid vague, abstract, or ambiguous phrasing. A cartoon depicts a man
who has fallen into a lake. As he struggles to swim, he shouts to his dog
on shore, “Lassie, get help!” In the next frame, the dog is lying on a
psychiatrist’s couch. We all know how opinions vary as to what
constitutes “help”: some members of my family, when asked to help with
the dishes, think “help” means supervision.
A couple in distress attending a workshop provides an additional
illustration of how nonspecific language can hamper understanding and
communication. “I want you to let me be me,” the woman declared to
her husband. “I do!” he retorted. “No, you don’t!” she insisted. Asked to
express herself in positive action language, the woman replied, “I want
you to give me the freedom to grow and be myself.” Such a statement,
however, is just as vague and likely to provoke a defensive response. She
struggled to formulate her request clearly, and then admitted, “It’s kind
of awkward, but if I were to be precise, I guess what I want is for you to
smile and say that anything I do is okay.” Often, the use of vague and
abstract language can mask oppressive interpersonal games.

=== PAGE 90 ===
Making requests in clear, positive, concrete action language reveals
what we really want.
A similar lack of clarity occurred between a father and his fifteen-year-
old son when they came in for counseling. “All I want is for you to start
showing a little responsibility,” claimed the father. “Is that asking too
much?” I suggested that he specify what it would take for his son to
demonstrate the responsibility he was seeking. After a discussion on how
to clarify his request, the father responded sheepishly, “Well, it doesn’t
sound so good, but when I say that I want responsibility, what I really
mean is that I want him to do what I ask, without question—to jump
when I say jump, and to smile while doing it.” He then agreed with me
that if his son were to actually behave this way, it would demonstrate
obedience rather than responsibility. Like this father, we often use vague
and abstract language to indicate how we want other people to feel or be
without naming a concrete action they could take to reach that state. For
example, an employer makes a genuine effort to invite feedback, telling
the employees, “I want you to feel free to express yourself around me.”
The statement communicates the employer’s desire for the employees to
“feel free,” but not what they could do in order to feel this way. Instead,
the employer could use positive action language to make a request: “I’d
like you to tell me what I might do to make it easier for you to feel free
to express yourselves around me.”
Vague language contributes to internal confusion.
As a final illustration of how the use of vague language contributes to
internal confusion, I would like to present the conversation that I would
invariably have during my practice as a clinical psychologist with the
many clients who came to me with complaints of depression. After I
empathized with the depth of feeling that a client had just expressed, our
exchanges would typically proceed in the following manner:
Depression is the reward we get for being “good.”
MBR: What are you wanting that you are not receiving?
Client: I don’t know what I want.

=== PAGE 91 ===
MBR: I guessed that you would say that.
Client: Why?
MBR: My theory is that we get depressed because we’re not getting what we
want, and we’re not getting what we want because we have never been
taught to get what we want. Instead, we’ve been taught to be good
little boys and girls and good mothers and fathers. If we’re going to be
one of those good things, better get used to being depressed.
Depression is the reward we get for being “good.” But, if you want to
feel better, I’d like you to clarify what you would like people to do to
make life more wonderful for you.
Client: I just want someone to love me. That’s hardly unreasonable, is it?
MBR: It’s a good start. Now I’d like you to clarify what you would like people to
do that would fulfill your need to be loved. For example, what could I
do right now?
Client: Oh, you know …
MBR: I’m not sure I do. I’d like you to tell me what you would like me, or others,
to do to give you the love you’re looking for.
Client: That’s hard.
MBR: Yes, it can be difficult to make clear requests. But think how hard it will be
for others to respond to our request if we’re not even clear what it is!
Client: I’m starting to get clear what I want from others to fulfill my need for love,
but it’s embarrassing.
MBR: Yes, very often it is embarrassing. So what would youlike for me or others
to do?
Client: If I really reflect upon what I’m requesting when I ask to be loved, I
suppose I want you to guess what I want before I’m even aware of it.
And then I want you to always do it.
MBR: I’m grateful for your clarity. I hope you can see how you are not likely to
find someone who can fulfill your need for love if that’s what it takes.
Very often, my clients were able to see how the lack of awareness of
what they wanted from others had contributed significantly to their
frustrations and depression.

=== PAGE 92 ===
Making Requests Consciously
Sometimes we may be able to communicate a clear request without
putting it in words. Suppose you’re in the kitchen and your sister, who is
watching television in the living room, calls out, “I’m thirsty.” In this
case, it may be obvious that she is requesting you to bring her a glass of
water from the kitchen.
However, in other instances, we may express our discomfort and
incorrectly assume that the listener has understood the underlying
request. For example, a might say to her husband, “I’m annoyed you
forgot the butter and onions I asked you to pick up for dinner.” While it
may be obvious to her that she is asking him to go back to the store, the
husband may think that her words were uttered solely to make him feel
guilty.
When we simply express our feelings, it may not be clear to the
listener what we want them to do.
Even more often, we are simply not conscious of what we are
requesting when we speak. We talk to others or at them without
knowing how to engage in a dialogue with them. We toss out words,
using the presence of others as a wastebasket. In such situations, the
listener, unable to discern a clear request in the speaker’s words, may
experience the kind of distress illustrated in the following anecdote.
We are often not conscious of what we are requesting.
I was seated directly across the aisle from a couple on a minitrain that
carries passengers to their respective terminals at the Dallas/Fort Worth
International Airport. For passengers in a hurry to catch a plane, the
snail’s pace of the train may well be irritating. The man turned to his
wife and said with intensity, “I have never seen a train go so slow in all
my life.” She said nothing, appearing tense and uneasy as to what
response he might be expecting from her. He then did what many of us
do when we’re not getting the response we want: he repeated himself. In
a markedly stronger voice, he exclaimed, “I have never seen a train go so
slow in all my life!”
The wife, at a loss for response, looked even more distressed. In

=== PAGE 93 ===
desperation, she turned to him and said, “They’re electronically timed.” I
didn’t think this piece of information would satisfy him, and indeed it
did not, for he repeated himself a third time—even more loudly, “I
HAVE NEVER SEEN A TRAIN GO SO SLOW IN ALL MY LIFE!“ The wife’s
patience was clearly exhausted as she snapped back angrily, “Well, what
do you want me to do about it? Get out and push?” Now there were two
people in pain!
Requests may sound like demands when unaccompanied by the
speaker’s feelings and needs.
What response was the man wanting? I believe he wanted to hear that
his pain was understood. If his wife had known this, she might have
responded, “It sounds like you’re scared we might miss our plane, and
disgusted because you’d like a faster train running between these
terminals.”
In the above exchange, the wife heard the husband’s frustration but
was clueless as to what he was asking for. Equally problematic is the
reverse situation—when people state their requests without first
communicating the feelings and needs behind them. This is especially
true when the request takes the form of a question. “Why don’t you go
and get a haircut?” can easily be heard by youngsters as a demand or an
attack unless parents remember to first reveal their own feelings and
needs: “We’re worried that your hair is getting so long it might keep you
from seeing things, especially when you’re on your bike. How about a
haircut?”
It is more common, however, for people to talk without being
conscious of what they are asking for. “I’m not requesting anything,”
they might remark. “I just felt like saying what I said.”
The clearer we are about what we want, the more likely it is that we’ll
get it.
My belief is that, whenever we say something to another person, we
are requesting something in return. It may simply be an empathic
connection—a verbal or nonverbal acknowledgment, as with the man on
the train, that our words have been understood. Or we may be

=== PAGE 94 ===
requesting honesty: we wish to know the listener’s honest reaction to our
words. Or we may be requesting an action that we hope would fulfill our
needs. The clearer we are on what we want back from the other person,
the more likely it is that our needs will be met.
Asking for a Reflection
As we know, the message we send is not always the message that’s
received. We generally rely on verbal cues to determine whether our
message has been understood to our satisfaction. If, however, we’re
uncertain that it has been received as intended, we need to be able to
clearly request a response that tells us how the message was heard so as
to be able to correct any misunderstanding. On some occasions, a simple
question like, “Is that clear?” will suffice. At other times, we need more
than “Yes, I understood you,” to feel confident that we’ve been truly
understood. At such times, we might ask others to reflect back in their
own words what they heard us say. We then have the opportunity to
restate parts of our message to address any discrepancy or omission we
might have noticed in their reflection.
To make sure the message we sent is the message that’s received, ask
the listener to reflect it back.
For example, a teacher approaches a student and says, “Peter, I got
concerned when I checked my record book yesterday. I want to make
sure you’re aware of the homework I’m missing from you. Will you drop
by my office after school?” Peter mumbles, “Okay, I know,” and then
turns away, leaving the teacher uneasy as to whether her message had
been accurately received. She asks for a reflection—”Could you tell me
what you just heard me say?”—to which Peter replies, “You said I gotta
miss soccer to stay after school because you didn’t like my homework.”
Confirmed in her suspicion that Peter had not heard her intended
message, the teacher tries to restate it, but first she is careful of her next
remark.
Express appreciation when your listener tries to meet your request for
a reflection.

=== PAGE 95 ===
An assertion like “You didn’t hear me,” “That’s not what I said,” or
“You’re misunderstanding me,” may easily lead Peter to think that he is
being chastised. Since the teacher perceives Peter as having sincerely
responded to her request for a reflection, she might say, “I’m grateful to
you for telling me what you heard. I can see that I didn’t make myself as
clear as I’d have liked, so let me try again.”
Empathize with the listener who doesn’t want to reflect back.
When we first begin asking others to reflect back what they hear us
say, it may feel awkward and strange because such requests are rarely
made. When I emphasize the importance of our ability to ask for
reflections, people often express reservations. They are worried about
reactions like, “What do you think I am—deaf?” or, “Quit playing your
psychological games.” To prevent such responses, we can explain to
people ahead of time why we may sometimes ask them to reflect back
our words. We make clear that we’re not testing their listening skills, but
checking out whether we’ve expressed ourselves clearly. However,
should the listener retort, “I heard what you said; I’m not stupid!” we
have the option to focus on the listener’s feelings and needs and ask—
either aloud or silently—”Are you saying you’re feeling annoyed because
you want respect for your ability to understand things?”
Requesting Honesty
After we’ve openly expressed ourselves and received the understanding
we want, we’re often eager to know the other person’s reaction to what
we’ve said. Usually the honesty we would like to receive takes one of
three directions:
After we express ourselves vulnerably, we often want to know (1)
what the listener is feeling;
Sometimes we’d like to know the feelings that are
stimulated by what we said, and the reasons for those
feelings. We might request this by asking, “I would like you
to tell me how you feel about what I just said, and your

=== PAGE 96 ===
reasons for feeling as you do.”
Sometimes we’d like to know something about our
listener’s thoughts in response to what they just heard us
say. At these times, it’s important to specify which
thoughts we’d like them to share. For example, we might
say, “I’d like you to tell me if you predict that my proposal
would be successful, and if not, what you believe would
prevent its success,” rather than simply saying, “I’d like
you to tell me what you think about what I’ve said.” When
we don’t specify which thoughts we would like to receive,
the other person may respond at great length with thoughts
that aren’t the ones we are seeking.
(2)what the listener is thinking; or
Sometimes we’d like to know whether the person is willing
to take certain actions that we’ve recommended. Such a
request
(3)whether the listener would be willing to take a particular
action.may sound like this: “I’d like you to tell me if you would be
willing to postpone our meeting for one week.”
The use of NVC requires that we be conscious of the specific form of
honesty we would like to receive, and to make that request for honesty
in concrete language.
Making Requests of a Group
It is especially important when we are addressing a group to be clear
about the kind of understanding or honesty we want back after we’ve
expressed ourselves. When we are not clear about the response we’d like,
we may initiate unproductive conversations that end up satisfying no
one’s needs.
I’ve been invited from time to time to work with groups of citizens
concerned about racism in their communities. One issue that frequently

=== PAGE 97 ===
arises among these groups is that their meetings are tedious and
fruitless. This lack of productivity is very costly for group members, who
often expend limited resources to arrange for transportation and child
care in order to attend meetings. Frustrated by prolonged discussions
that yield little direction, many members quit the groups, declaring
meetings a waste of time. Furthermore, the institutional changes they
are striving to make are not usually ones that occur quickly or easily. For
all these reasons, when such groups do meet, it’s important that they
make good use of their time together.
I knew members of one such group that had been organized to effect
change in the local school system. It was their belief that various
elements in the school system discriminated against students on the basis
of race. Because their meetings were unproductive and the group was
losing members, they invited me to observe their discussions. I suggested
that they conduct their meeting as usual, and that I would let them know
if I saw any ways NVC might help.
One man began the meeting by calling the group’s attention to a
recent newspaper article in which a minority mother had raised
complaints and concerns regarding the principal’s treatment of her
daughter. A woman responded by sharing a situation that had occurred
to her when she was a student at the same school. One by one, each
member then related a similar personal experience. After twenty minutes
I asked the group if their needs were being met by the current
discussion. Not one person said yes. “This is what happens all the time in
these meetings!” huffed one man, “I have better things to do with my
time than sit around listening to the same old bullshit.”
I then addressed the man who had initiated the discussion: “Can you
tell me, when you brought up the newspaper article, what response you
were wanting from the group?”
“I thought it was interesting,” he replied. I explained that I was asking
what response he wanted from the group, rather than what he thought
about the article. He pondered awhile and then conceded, “I’m not sure
what I wanted.”
And that’s why, I believe, twenty minutes of the group’s valuable time
had been squandered on fruitless discourse. When we address a group

=== PAGE 98 ===
without being clear what we are wanting back, unproductive discussions
will often follow.
In a group, much time is wasted when speakers aren’t certain what
response they’re wanting.
However, if even one member of a group is conscious of the
importance of clearly requesting the response that is desired, he or she
can extend this consciousness to the group. For example, when this
particular speaker didn’t define what response he wanted, a member of
the group might have said, “I’m confused about how you’d like us
torespond to your story. Would you be willing to say what response
you’d like from us?” Such interventions can prevent the waste of
precious group time.
Conversations often drag on and on, fulfilling no one’s needs, because
it is unclear whether the initiator of the conversation has gotten what
she or he wanted. In India, when people have received the response they
want in conversations they have initiated, they say “bas“ (pronounced
“bus”). This means, “You need not say more. I feel satisfied and am now
ready to move on to something else.”
Though we lack such a word in our own language, we can benefit
from developing and promoting “bas-consciousness” in all our
interactions.
Requests versus Demands
When the other person hears a demand from us, they see two options:
to submit or to rebel.
Our requests are received as demands when others believe they will be
blamed or punished if they do not comply. When people hear a demand,
they see only two options: submission or rebellion. Either way, the
person requesting is perceived as coercive, and the listener’s capacity to
respond compassionately to the request is diminished.
To tell if it’s a demand or a request, observe what the speaker does if

=== PAGE 99 ===
the request is not complied with.
The more we have in the past blamed, punished, or “laid guilt trips”
on others when they haven’t responded to our requests, the higher the
likelihood that our requests will now be heard as demands. We also pay
for others’ use of such tactics. To the degree that people in our lives have
been blamed, punished, or urged to feel guilty for not doing what others
have requested, the more likely they are to carry this baggage to every
subsequent relationship and hear a demand in any request.
It’s a demand if the speaker then criticizes or judges.
Let’s look at two variations of a situation. Jack says to his friend Jane,
“I’m lonely and would like you to spend the evening with me.” Is that a
request or a demand? The answer is that we don’t know until we observe
how Jack treats Jane if she doesn’t comply. Suppose she replies, “Jack,
I’m really tired. If you’d like some company, how about finding someone
else to be with you this evening?” If Jack then remarks, “How typical of
you to be so selfish!” his request was in fact a demand. Instead of
empathizing with her need to rest, he has blamed her.
Consider a second scenario:
Jack: I’m lonely and would like you to spend the evening with me.
Jane: Jack, I’m really tired. If you’d like some company, how about finding someone else to be
with you tonight?
Jack: (turns away wordlessly)
Jane: (sensing he is upset) Is something bothering you?
Jack: No.
Jane: Come on, Jack, I can sense something’s going on. What’s the matter?
Jack: You know how lonely I’m feeling. If you really loved me, you’d spend the evening with
me.
It’s a demand if the speaker then lays a guilt trip.
Again, instead of empathizing, Jack now interprets Jane’s response to
mean that she doesn’t love him and that she has rejected him. The more
we interpret noncompliance as rejection, the more likely our requests

=== PAGE 100 ===
will be heard as demands. This leads to a self-fulfilling prophecy, for the
more people hear demands, the less they enjoy being around us.
On the other hand, we would know that Jack’s request had been a
genuine request, not a demand, if his response to Jane had expressed a
respectful recognition of her feelings and needs. For example: “So, Jane,
you’re feeling worn out and needing some rest this evening?”
It’s a request if the speaker then shows empathy toward the other
person’s needs.
We can help others trust that we are requesting, not demanding, by
indicating that we would only want them to comply if they can do so
willingly. Thus we might ask, “Would you be willing to set the table?”
rather than “I would like you to set the table.” However, the most
powerful way to communicate that we are making a genuine request is
to empathize with people when they don’t agree to the request.
We demonstrate that we are making a request rather than a demand
by how we respond when others don’t comply. If we are prepared to
show an empathic understanding
of what prevents someone from doing as we asked, then by my
definition, we have made a request, not a demand. Choosing to request
rather than demand does not mean we give up when someone says no to
our request. It does mean that we don’t engage in persuasion until we
have empathized with what’s preventing the other person from saying
yes.
Defining Our Objective When Making Requests
Expressing genuine requests also requires an awareness of our
objective. If our objective is only to change people and their behavior or
to get our way, then NVC is not an appropriate tool. The process is
designed for those of us who would like others to change and respond,
but only if they choose to do so willingly and compassionately. The
objective of NVC is to establish a relationship based on honesty and
empathy. When others trust that our primary commitment is to the
quality of the relationship, and that we expect this process to fulfill

=== PAGE 101 ===
everyone’s needs, then they can trust that our requests are true requests
and not camouflaged demands.
Our objective is a relationship based on honesty and empathy.
A consciousness of this objective is difficult to maintain, especially for
parents, teachers, managers, and others whose work centers around
influencing people and obtaining behavioral results. A mother who once
returned to a workshop after a lunch break announced, “Marshall, I went
home and tried it. It didn’t work.” I asked her to describe what she’d
done.
“I went home and expressed my feelings and needs, just as we’d
practiced. I made no criticism, no judgments of my son. I simply said,
‘Look, when I see that you haven’t done the work you said you were
going to do, I feel very disappointed. I wanted to be able to come home
and find the house in order and your chores completed.’ Then I made a
request: I told him I wanted him to clean it up immediately.”
“It sounds like you clearly expressed all the components,” I
commented. “What happened?”
“He didn’t do it.”
“Then what happened?” I asked.
“I told him he couldn’t go through life being lazy and irresponsible.”
I could see that this woman was not yet able to distinguish between
expressing requests and making demands. She was still defining the
process as successful only if she got compliance for her “requests.”
During the initial phases of learning this process, we may find ourselves
applying the components of NVC mechanically without awareness of the
underlying purpose.
Sometimes, however, even when we’re conscious of our intent and
express our request with care, people may still hear a demand. This is
particularly true when we occupy positions of authority and are
speaking with those who have had past experiences with coercive
authority figures.
Once, the administrator of a high school invited me to demonstrate to
teachers how NVC might help them communicate with students who

=== PAGE 102 ===
weren’t cooperating as the teachers would have liked.
I was asked to meet with forty students who had been deemed
“socially and emotionally maladjusted.” I was struck by the way such
labels serve as self-fulfilling prophecies. If you were a student who had
been thus labeled, wouldn’t it just give you permission to have some fun
at school by resisting whatever was asked of you? When we give people
labels, we tend to act in a way that contributes to the very behavior that
concerns us, which we then view as further confirmation of our
diagnosis. Since these students knew they had been classified as “socially
and emotionally maladjusted,” I wasn’t surprised that when I walked in,
most of them were hanging out the window hollering obscenities at their
friends in the courtyard below.
I began by making a request: “I’d like you all to come over and sit
down so I can tell you who I am and what I’d like us to do today.” About
half the students came over. Uncertain that they had all heard me, I
repeated my request. With that, the remainder of the
students sat down, with the exception of two young men who
remained draped over the windowsill. Unfortunately for me, these two
were the biggest students in the class.
“Excuse me,” I addressed them, “would one of you two gentlemen tell
me what you heard me say?” One of them turned toward me and
snorted, “Yeah, you said we had to go over there and sit down.” I
thought to myself, “Uh, oh, he’s heard my request as a demand.”
Out loud I said, “Sir”—I’ve learned always to say “sir” to people with
biceps like his, especially when one of them sports a tattoo—”would you
be willing to tell me how I could have let you know what I was wanting
so that it wouldn’t sound like I was bossing you around?”
“Huh?” Having been conditioned to expect demands from authorities,
he was not used to my different approach. “How can I let you know
what I’m wanting from you so it doesn’t sound like I don’t care about
what you’d like?” I repeated. He hesitated for a moment and shrugged,
“I don’t know.”
“What’s going on between you and me right now is a good example of
what I was wanting us to talk about today. I believe people can enjoy
each other a lot better if they can say what they would like without

=== PAGE 103 ===
bossing others around. When I tell you what I’d like, I’m not saying that
you have to do it or I’ll try to make your life miserable. I don’t know
how to say that in a way that you can trust.” To my relief, this seemed to
make sense to the young man who, together with his friend, sauntered
over to join the group. In certain situations, such as this one, it may take
awhile for our requests to be clearly seen for what they are.
When making a request, it is also helpful to scan our minds for the
sort of thoughts that automatically transform requests into demands:
He should be cleaning up after himself.
She’s supposed to do what I ask.
I deserve to get a raise.
I’m justified in having them stay later.
I have a right to more time off.
When we frame our needs with these thoughts, we are bound to judge
others when they don’t do as we request. I had these self-righteous
thoughts in my mind once when my younger son was not taking out the
garbage. When we were dividing the household chores, he had agreed to
this task, but every day we would have another struggle about getting
the garbage out. Every day I would remind him, “This is your job,” and
“We all have jobs”—with the sole objective of getting him to take out
the garbage.
Finally, one night I listened more closely to what he’d been telling me
all along about why the garbage wasn’t going out. I wrote the following
song after that evening’s discussion. After my son felt my empathy for
his position, he began taking out the garbage without any further
reminder from me.
If I clearly understand
you intend no demand,
I’ll usually respond when you call.
But if you come across
like a high and mighty boss,
you’ll feel like you ran into a wall.
And when you remind me

=== PAGE 104 ===
so piously
about all those things you’ve done for me,
you’d better get ready:
Here comes another bout!
Then you can shout,
you can spit,
moan, groan, and throw a fit;
I still won’t take the garbage out.
Now even if you should change your style,
It’s going to take me a little while
before I can forgive and forget.
Because it seems to me that you
didn’t see me as human too
until all your standards were met.
—”Song from Brett” by Marshall B. Rosenberg
Summary
The fourth component of NVC addresses the question of what we would
like to request of each other to enrich each of our lives. We try to avoid
vague, abstract, or ambiguous phrasing, and remember to use positive
action language by stating what we are requesting rather than what we
are not.
Each time we speak, the clearer we are about what we want back, the
more likely we are to get it. Since the message we send is not always the
message that’s received, we need to learn how to find out if our message
has been accurately heard. Especially when we are expressing ourselves
in a group, we need to be clear about the nature of the response we are
wanting. Otherwise we may be initiating unproductive conversations
that waste considerable group time.
Requests are received as demands when listeners believe that they will
be blamed or punished if they do not comply. We can help others trust
that we are requesting, not demanding, by indicating our desire for them
to comply only if they can do so willingly. The objective of NVC is not to

=== PAGE 105 ===
change people and their behavior in order to get our way; it is to
establish relationships based on honesty and empathy that will
eventually fulfill everyone’s needs.
NVC in Action
Sharing Fears About a Best Friend’s Smoking
Al and Burt have been best friends for over thirty years. Al, a nonsmoker, has
done everything he can over the years to persuade Burt to give up his two-pack-a-
day habit. In the past, when Al had tried to get him to quit, Burt had often accused
Al of judging him.
Aware during the past year of the increasing severity of his friend’s hacking
cough, Al finds himself bursting out one day with all the energy and life that had
been buried in his unexpressed anger and fear.
Al: Burt, I know we’ve talked about this a dozen times, but listen. I’m scared your
damned cigarettes ar!1 going to kill you! You’re my best friend, and I
wan!1 you around for as long as I can have you. Pleas!1 don’t think I’m
judging you. I’m not—I’m just reall!1 worried.
Burt: No, I hear your concern. We’ve been friends for !1 long time …
Al: (making a request) Would you be willing to quit?
Burt: I wish I could.
Al: (listening for the feelings and needs preventing Burtfrom agreeing to the request)
Are you scared to tr!1 because you don’t want to fail?
Burt: Yeah … you know how many times I’ve tried before … I know people think
less of me for not being abl!1 to quit.
Al: (guessing at what Burt might want to request) I don’t think less of you. And if
you tried and failed again, !1 still wouldn’t. I just wish you’d try.
Burt: Thanks. But you’re not the only one…. It’s everyone: you can see it in their
eyes—they think you’re a failure.
Al: (empathizing with Burt’s feeling) Is it kind o!1 overwhelming to worry about
what others migh!1 think, when just quitting is hard enough?
Burt: I really hate the idea that I might be addicted, that !1 have something that I
just can’t control …

=== PAGE 106 ===
Al: (Al’s eyes connect with Burt’s; he nods his head. Al’s interest and attention to
Burt’s deep feelings and needs are revealed through his eyes and the
silence that follows.)
Burt: I mean, I don’t even like smoking any more. It’s like you’re a pariah if you
do it in public. It’s embarrassing.
Al:(continuing to empathize) It sounds like you’d really like to quit, but are scared
you might fail—and how that would be for your self-image and
confidence.
Burt: Yeah, I guess that’s it…. You know, I don’t think I’ve ever talked about it
before. Usually when people tell me to quit, I just tell them to get lost.
I’d like to quit, but I don’t want all that pressure from people.
Al: I wouldn’t want to pressure you. I don’t know if I could reassure you about
your fears around not succeeding, but I sure would like to support you
in any way I can. That is … if you want me to….
Burt: Yes, I do. I’m really touched by your concern and willingness. But …
suppose I’m not ready to try yet, is that okay with you too?
Al: Of course, Burt, I’ll still like you as much. It’s just that I want to like you for
longer! Because Al’s request was a genuine request, not a demand, he
maintained awareness of his commitment to the quality of the
relationship, regardless of Burt’s response. He expressed this awareness
and his respect for Burt’s need for autonomy through his words, “I’ll
still like you,” while simultaneously expressing his own need “to like
you for longer.”
Burt: Well, then, maybe I will try again … but don’t tell anyone else, okay?
Al: Sure, you decide when you’re ready; I won’t be mentioning it to anybody.
Exercise 4
EXPRESSING REQUESTS
To see whether we’re in agreement about the clear expression of
requests, circle the number in front of each of the following statements
in which the speaker is clearly requesting that a specific action be taken.
1. “I want you to understand me.”
2. “I’d like you to tell me one thing that I did that you

=== PAGE 107 ===
appreciate.”
3. “I’d like you to feel more confidence in yourself.”
4. “I want you to stop drinking.”
5. “I’d like you to let me be me.”
6. “I’d like you to be honest with me about yesterday’s
meeting.”
7. “I would like you to drive at or below the speed limit.”
8. “I’d like to get to know you better.”
9. “I would like you to show respect for my privacy.” 10. “I’d
like you to prepare supper more often.”
Here are my responses for Exercise 4:
1. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the word understand does not clearly express a request for a
specific action. A request for a specific action might be: “I
want you to tell me what you heard me say.”
2. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that the
speaker is clearly requesting a specific action.
3. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the words feel more confidence do not clearly express a
request for a specific action. A request for a specific action
might be: “I’d like you to take a course in assertiveness
training, which I believe would increase your self-
confidence.”
4. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the words stop drinking do not express what the speaker
wants, but rather what he or she doesn’t want. A request
for a specific action might be: “I want you to tell me what
needs of yours are met by drinking, and to discuss with me
other ways of meeting those needs.”
5. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the words let me be me do not clearly express a request for
a specific action. A request for a specific action might be: “I
want you to tell me you won’t leave our relationship—even
if I do some things that you don’t like.”
6. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,

=== PAGE 108 ===
the words be honest with me do not clearly express a request
for a specific action. A request for a specific action might
be: “I want you to tell me how you feel about what I did
and what you’d like me to do differently.”
7. If you circled this number, we’re in agreement that the
speaker is clearly requesting a specific action.
8. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the words get to know you better do not clearly express a
request for a specific action. A request for a specific action
might be: “I’d like you to tell me if you would be willing to
meet for lunch once a week.”
9. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the words show respect for my privacy do not clearly express
a request for a specific action. A request for a specific
action might be: “I’d like you to agree to knock before you
enter my office.”
10. If you circled this number, we’re not in agreement. To me,
the words more often do not clearly express a request for a
specific action. A request for a specific action might be: “I’d
like you to prepare supper every Monday night.”

=== PAGE 109 ===
CHAPTER SEVEN

=== PAGE 110 ===
T
Receiving Empathically
he last four chapters described the four components of NVC: what we
are observing, feeling, and needing, and what we would like to
request to enrich our lives. Now we turn from self-expression to apply
these same four components to hearing what others are observing,
feeling, needing, and requesting. We refer to this part of the
communication process as receiving empathically.
The two parts of NVC:
1.expressing honestly
2.receiving empathically
Presence: Don’t Just Do Something, Stand There
Empathy: emptying our mind and listening with our whole being
Empathy is a respectful understanding of what others are
experiencing. The Chinese philosopher Chuang-Tzu stated that true
empathy requires listening with the whole being: “The hearing that is
only in the ears is one thing. The hearing of the understanding is
another. But the hearing of the spirit is not limited to any one faculty, to
the ear, or to the mind. Hence it demands the emptiness of all the
faculties. And when the faculties are empty, then the whole being
listens. There is then a direct grasp of what is right there before you that
can never be heard with the ear or understood with the mind.”
Empathy with others occurs only when we have successfully shed all
preconceived ideas and judgments about them. The Austrian-born Israeli
philosopher Martin Buber describes this quality of presence that life
demands of us: “In spite of all similarities, every
living situation has, like a newborn child, a new face, that has never
been before and will never come again. It demands of you a reaction
that cannot be prepared beforehand. It demands nothing of what is past.
It demands presence, responsibility; it demands you.”

=== PAGE 111 ===
The presence that empathy requires is not easy to maintain. “The
capacity to give one’s attention to a sufferer is a very rare and difficult
thing; it is almost a miracle; it is a miracle,” asserts French philosopher
Simone Weil. “Nearly all those who think they have the capacity do not
possess it.” Instead of offering empathy, we tend instead to give advice
or reassurance and to explain our own position or feeling. Empathy, on
the other hand, requires us to focus full attention on the other person’s
message. We give to others the time and space they need to express
themselves fully and to feel understood. There is a Buddhist saying that
aptly describes this ability: “Don’t just do something, stand there.”
Ask before offering advice or reassurance.
It is often frustrating for someone needing empathy to have us assume
that they want reassurance or “fix-it” advice. I received a lesson from my
daughter that taught me to check whether advice or reassurance is
wanted before offering any. She was looking in the mirror one day and
said, “I’m as ugly as a pig.”
“You’re the most gorgeous creature God ever put on the face of the
earth,” I declared. She shot me a look of exasperation, exclaimed, “Oh,
Daddy!” and slammed the door as she left the room. I later found out
that she had wanted some empathy. Instead of my ill-timed reassurance,
I could have asked, “Are you feeling disappointed with your appearance
today?”
My friend Holley Humphrey identified some common behaviors that
prevent us from being sufficiently present to connect empathically with
others. The following are examples:
Advising: “I think you should … “ “How come you didn’t
… ?”
One-upping: “That’s nothing; wait’ll you hear what
happened to me.”
Educating: “This could turn into a very positive experience
for you if you just … “
Consoling: “It wasn’t your fault; you did the best you
could.”
Story-telling: “That reminds me of the time … “

=== PAGE 112 ===
Shutting down: “Cheer up. Don’t feel so bad.”
Sympathizing: “Oh, you poor thing … “
Interrogating: “When did this begin?”
Explaining: “I would have called but … “
Correcting: “That’s not how it happened.”
In his book When Bad Things Happen to Good People, Rabbi Harold
Kushner describes how painful it was for him, when his son was dying,
to hear the words people offered that were intended to make him feel
better. Even more painful was his recognition that for twenty years he
had been saying the same things to other people in similar situations!
Intellectual understanding blocks empathy.
Believing we have to “fix” situations and make others feel better
prevents us from being present. Those of us in the role of counselor or
psychotherapist are particularly susceptible to this belief. Once, when I
was working with twenty-three mental health professionals, I asked
them to write, word for word, how they would respond to a client who
says, “I’m feeling very depressed. I just don’t see any reason to go on.” I
collected the answers they had written down and announced, “I am now
going to read out loud what each of you wrote. Imagine yourself in the
role of the person who expressed the feeling of depression, and raise
your hand after each statement you hear that gives you a sense that
you’ve been understood.” Hands were raised to only three of the twenty-
three responses. Questions such as, “When did this begin?” constituted
the most frequent response; they give the appearance that the
professional is obtaining the information necessary to diagnose and then
treat the problem. In fact, such intellectual understanding of a problem
blocks the kind of presence that empathy requires. When we are
thinking about people’s words and listening to how they connect to our
theories, we are looking at people—we are not with them.
The key ingredient of empathy is presence: we are wholly present with
the other party and what they are experiencing. This quality of presence
distinguishes empathy from either mental understanding or sympathy.
While we may choose at times to sympathize with others by feeling their
feelings, it’s helpful to be aware that during the moment we are offering

=== PAGE 113 ===
sympathy, we are not empathizing.
Listening for Feelings and Needs
In NVC, no matter what words people use to express themselves, we
listen for their observations, feelings, needs, and requests. Imagine
you’ve loaned your car to a new neighbor who had a personal
emergency, and when your family finds out, they react with intensity:
“You are a fool for having trusted a total stranger!” You can use the
components of NVC to tune in to the feelings and needs of those family
members in contrast to either (1) blaming yourself by taking the
message personally, or (2) blaming and judging them.
No matter what others say, we only hear what they are (1) observing,
(2) feeling, (3) needing, and (4) requesting.
In this situation, it’s obvious what the family is observing and reacting
to: the lending of the car to a relative stranger. In other situations, it
may not be so clear. If a colleague tells us, “You’re not a good team
player,” we may not know what he or she is observing, although we can
usually guess at the behavior that might have triggered such a statement.
The following exchange, from a workshop, demonstrates the difficulty
of focusing on other people’s feelings and needs when we are
accustomed to assuming responsibility for their feelings and taking
messages personally. The woman in this dialogue wanted to learn to
hear the feelings and needs behind certain of her husband’s statements. I
suggested that she guess at his feelings and needs and then check it out
with him.
Husband’s statement: What good does talking to you do? You never listen.
Woman: Are you feeling unhappy with me?
MBR: When you say “with me,” you imply that his feelings are the result of what you did. I
would prefer for you to say, “Are you unhappy because you were needing … ?” and
not “Are you unhappy with me?” It would put your attention on what’s going on
within him and decrease the likelihood of your taking the message personally.
Woman: But what would I say? “Are you unhappy because you … ? Because you what?”

=== PAGE 114 ===
MBR: Get your clue from the content of your husband’s message, “What good does talking to
you do? You never listen.” What is he needing that he’s not getting when he says
that?
Woman: (trying to empathize with the needs expressed through her husband’s message) Are you
feeling unhappy because you feel like I don’t understand you?
Listen to what people are needing rather than what they are thinking.
MBR: Notice that you are focusing on what he’s thinking, and not on what he’s needing. I think
you’ll find people to be less threatening if you hear what they’re needing rather than
what they’re thinking about you. Instead of hearing that he’s unhappy because he
thinks you don’t listen, focus on what he’s needing by saying, “Are you unhappy
because you are needing … ”
Woman: (trying again) Are you feeling unhappy because you are needing to be heard?
MBR: That’s what I had in mind. Does it make a difference for you to hear him this way?
Woman: Definitely—a big difference. I see what’s going on for him without hearing that I had
done anything wrong.
Paraphrasing
After we focus our attention and hear what others are observing, feeling,
and needing and what they are requesting to enrich their lives, we may
wish to reflect back by paraphrasing what we have understood. In our
previous discussion on requests (Chapter 6), we discussed how to ask for
a reflection; now we will look at how to offer it to others.
If we have accurately received the other party’s message, our
paraphrasing will confirm this for them. If, on the other hand, our
paraphrase is incorrect, we give the speaker an opportunity to correct us.
Another advantage of choosing to reflect a message back to the other
party is that it offers them time to reflect on what they’ve said and an
opportunity to delve deeper into themselves.
NVC suggests that our paraphrasing take the form of questions that
reveal our understanding while eliciting any necessary corrections from
the speaker. Questions may focus on these components:
1. what others are observing: “Are you reacting to how many

=== PAGE 115 ===
evenings I was gone last week?”
2. how others are feeling and the needs generating their
feelings: “Are you feeling hurt because you would have
liked more appreciation of your efforts than you received?”
3. what others are requesting: “Are you wanting me to tell
you my reasons for saying what I did?”
These questions require us to sense what’s going on within other
people, while inviting their corrections should we have sensed
incorrectly. Notice the difference between these questions and the ones
below:
1. “What did I do that you are referring to?”
2. “How are you feeling?” “Why are you feeling that way?”
3. “What are you wanting me to do about it?”
When asking for information, first express our own feelings and needs.
This second set of questions asks for information without first sensing
the speaker’s reality. Though they may appear to be the most direct way
to connect with what’s going on within the other person, I’ve found that
questions like these are not the safest route to obtain the information we
seek. Many such questions may give speakers the impression that we’re a
schoolteacher examining them or a psychotherapist working on a case. If
we do decide to ask for information in this way, however, I’ve found that
people feel safer if we first reveal the feelings and needs within ourselves
that are generating the question. Thus, instead of asking someone, “What
did I do?” we might say, “I’m frustrated because I’d like to be clearer
about what you are referring to. Would you be willing to tell me what
I’ve done that leads you to see me in this way?” While this step may not
be necessary—or even helpful—in situations where our feelings and
needs are clearly conveyed by the context or tone of voice, I would
recommend it particularly during moments when the questions we ask
are accompanied by strong emotions.
How do we determine if an occasion calls for us to reflect people’s
messages back to them? Certainly if we are unsure that we have
accurately understood the message, we might use paraphrasing to elicit

=== PAGE 116 ===
a correction to our guess. But even if we are confident that we’ve
understood them, we may sense the other party wanting confirmation
that their message has been accurately received. They may even express
this desire overtly by asking, “Is that clear?” or “Do you understand
what I mean?” At such moments, hearing a clear paraphrase will often
be more reassuring to the speaker than hearing simply, “Yes, I
understand.”
For example, shortly after participating in an NVC training, a
volunteer at a hospital was requested by some nurses to talk to an
elderly patient: “We’ve told this woman she isn’t that sick and that she’d
get better if she took her medicine, but all she does is sit in her room all
day long repeating, ‘I want to die. I want to die.’” The volunteer
approached the elderly woman, and as the nurses had predicted, found
her sitting alone, whispering over and over, “I want to die.”
“So you would like to die,” the volunteer empathized. Surprised, the
woman broke off her chant and appeared relieved. She began to talk
about how no one understood how terrible she was feeling. The
volunteer continued to reflect back the woman’s feelings; before long,
such warmth had entered their dialogue that they were sitting with their
arms locked around each other. Later that day, the nurses questioned the
volunteer about her magic formula: the elderly woman had started to eat
and take her medicine, and was apparently in better spirits. Although
the nurses had tried to help her with advice and reassurance, it wasn’t
until her interaction with the volunteer that this woman received what
she was truly needing: connection with another human being who could
hear her profound despair.
There are no infallible guidelines regarding when to paraphrase, but
as a rule of thumb, it is safe to assume that speakers expressing intensely
emotional messages would appreciate our reflecting these back to them.
When we ourselves are talking, we can make it easier for the listener if
we clearly signify when we want or don’t want our words to be reflected
back to us.
Reflect back messages that are emotionally charged.
There are occasions when we may choose not to verbally reflect
someone’s statements out of respect for certain cultural norms. For

=== PAGE 117 ===
example, a Chinese man once attended a workshop to learn how to hear
the feelings and needs behind his father’s remarks. Because he could not
bear the criticism and attack he continually heard in his father’s words,
this man dreaded visiting his father and avoided him for months at a
time. He came to me ten years later and reported that his ability to hear
feelings and needs had radically transformed his relationship with his
father to the point where they now enjoy a close and loving connection.
Although he listens for his father’s feelings and needs, however, he does
not paraphrase what he hears. “I never say it out loud,” he explained.
“In our culture, to direct-talk to a person about their feelings is
something they’re not used to. But thanks to the fact that I no longer
hear what he says as an attack, but as his own feelings and needs, our
relationship has become enormously wonderful.”
Paraphrase only when it contributes to greater compassion and
understanding.
“So you’re never going to talk directly to him about feelings, but it
helps to be able to hear them?” I asked.
“No, now I think I’m probably ready,” he answered. “Now that we
have such a solid relationship, if I were to say to him, ‘Dad, I’d like to be
able to talk directly to you about what we are feeling,’ I think he just
might be ready to do it.”
When we paraphrase, the tone of voice we use is highly important.
When hearing themselves reflected back, people are likely to be sensitive
to the slightest hint of criticism or sarcasm. They are likewise negatively
affected by a declarative tone that implies that we are telling them what
is going on inside of them. If we are consciously listening for other
people’s feelings and needs, however, our tone communicates that we’re
asking whether we have understood—not claiming that we have
understood.
Behind intimidating messages are merely people appealing to us to
meet their needs.
We also need to be prepared for the possibility that the intention
behind our paraphrasing will be misinterpreted. “Don’t pull any of that

=== PAGE 118 ===
psychology crap on me!” we may be told. Should this occur, we continue
our effort to sense the speaker’s feelings and needs; perhaps we see in
this case that the speaker doesn’t trust our motives and needs more
understanding of our intentions before he can appreciate hearing our
paraphrases. As we’ve seen, all criticism, attack, insults, and judgments
vanish when we focus attention on hearing the feelings and needs
behind a message. The more we practice in this way, the more we
realize a simple truth: behind all those messages we’ve allowed ourselves
to be intimidated by are just individuals with unmet needs appealing to
us to contribute to their well-being. When we receive messages with this
awareness, we never feel dehumanized by what others have to say to us.
We only feel dehumanized when we get trapped in derogatory images of
other people or thoughts of wrongness about ourselves.
As author and mythologist Joseph
Campbell suggested, “‘What will they think of me?’ must be put aside
for bliss.” We begin to feel this bliss when messages previously
experienced as critical or blaming begin to be seen for the gifts they are:
opportunities to give to people who are in pain.
A difficult message becomes an opportunity to enrich someone’s life.
If it happens regularly that people distrust our motives and sincerity
when we paraphrase their words, we may need to examine our own
intentions more closely. Perhaps we are paraphrasing and engaging the
components of NVC in a mechanistic way without maintaining clear
consciousness of purpose. We might ask ourselves, for example, whether
we are more intent on applying the process “correctly” than on
connecting with the human being in front of us. Or perhaps, even though
we are using the form of NVC, our only interest is in changing the other
person’s behavior.
Some people resist paraphrasing as a waste of time. One city
administrator explained during a practice session, “I’m paid to give facts
and solutions, not to sit around doing psychotherapy with everyone who
comes into my office.” This same administrator, however, was being
confronted by angry citizens who would come to him with their
passionate concerns and leave dissatisfied for not having been heard.
Some of these citizens later confided to me, “When you go to his office,

=== PAGE 119 ===
he gives you a bunch of facts, but you never know whether he’s heard
you first. When that happens, you start to distrust his facts.”
Paraphrasing tends to save, rather than waste, time. Studies in labor-
management negotiations demonstrate that the time required to reach
conflict resolution is cut in half when each negotiator agrees, before
responding, to accurately repeat what the previous speaker had said.
Paraphrasing saves time.
I recall a man who was initially skeptical about the value of
paraphrasing. He and his wife were attending an NVC workshop
during a time when their marriage was beset by serious problems.
During the workshop, his wife said to him, “You never listen to me.”
“I do too,” he replied.
“No, you don’t,” she countered.
I addressed the husband: “I’m afraid you just proved her point. You
didn’t respond in a way that lets her know that you were listening to
her.”
He was puzzled by the point I was making, so I asked for permission
to play his role—which he gladly gave since he wasn’t having too much
success with it. His wife and I then had the following exchange:
Wife: “You never listen to me.”
MBR in role of husband: “It sounds like you’re terribly frustrated
because you would like to feel more connection when we speak.”
The wife was moved to tears when she finally received this
confirmation that she had been understood. I turned to the husband and
explained, “I believe this is what she is telling you she needs—a
reflection of her feelings and needs as a confirmation that she’d been
heard.” The husband seemed dumbfounded. “Is that all she wanted?” he
asked, incredulous that such a simple act could have had such a strong
impact on his wife.
A short time later, he enjoyed the satisfaction firsthand when his wife
reflected back to him a statement that he had made with great emotional
intensity. Savoring her paraphrase, he looked at me and declared, “It’s
valid.” It is a poignant experience to receive concrete evidence that

=== PAGE 120 ===
someone is empathically connected to us.
Sustaining Empathy
I recommend allowing others the opportunity to fully express themselves
before turning our attention to solutions or requests for relief. When we
proceed too quickly to what people might be requesting, we may not
convey our genuine interest in their feelings and needs; instead, they
may get the impression that we’re in a hurry to either be free of them or
to fix their problem. Furthermore, an initial message is often like the tip
of an iceberg;
it may be followed by as yet unexpressed, but related—and often more
powerful—feelings. By maintaining our attention on what’s going on
within others, we offer them a chance to fully explore and express their
interior selves. We would stem this flow if we were to shift attention too
quickly either to their request or to our own desire to express ourselves.
When we stay with empathy, we allow speakers to touch deeper levels
of themselves.
Suppose a mother comes to us, saying, “My child is impossible. No
matter what I tell him to do, he doesn’t listen.” We might reflect her
feelings and needs by saying, “It sounds like you’re feeling desperate and
would like to find some way of connecting with your son.” Such a
paraphrase often encourages a person to look within. If we have
accurately reflected her statement, the mother might touch upon other
feelings: “Maybe it’s my fault. I’m always yelling at him.” As the listener,
we would continue to stay with the feelings and needs being expressed
and say, for example, “Are you feeling guilty because you would have
liked to have been more understanding of him than you have been at
times?” If the mother continues to sense understanding in our reflection,
she might move further into her feelings and declare, “I’m just a failure
as a mother.” We continue to remain with the feelings and needs being
expressed: “So you’re feeling discouraged and want to relate differently
to him?” We persist in this manner until the person has exhausted all her
feelings surrounding this issue.

=== PAGE 121 ===
We know a speaker has received adequate empathy when (1) we sense
a release of tension, or (2) the flow of words comes to a halt.
What evidence is there that we’ve adequately empathized with the
other person? First, when an individual realizes that everything going on
within has received full empathic understanding, they will experience a
sense of relief. We can become aware of this phenomenon by noticing a
corresponding release of tension in our own body. A second, even more
obvious sign is that the person will stop talking. If we are uncertain as to
whether we have stayed long enough in the process, we can always ask,
“Is there more that you wanted to say?”
When Pain Blocks Our Ability to Empathize
It is impossible for us to give something to another if we don’t have it
ourselves. Likewise, if we find ourselves unable or unwilling to
empathize despite our
efforts, it is usually a sign that we are too starved for empathy to be
able to offer it to others. Sometimes, if we openly acknowledge that our
own distress is preventing us from responding empathically, the other
person may come through with the empathy we need.
We need empathy to give empathy.
At other times, it may be necessary to provide ourselves with some
“emergency first aid” empathy by listening to what’s going on in
ourselves with the same quality of presence and attention that we offer
to others. Former United Nations Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
once said, “The more faithfully you listen to the voice within you, the
better you will hear what is happening outside.” If we become skilled at
giving ourselves empathy, we often experience in just a few seconds a
natural release of energy that then enables us to be present with the
other person. If this fails to happen, however, we have a couple of other
choices.
We can scream—nonviolently. I recall spending three days mediating
between two gangs that had been killing each other off. One gang called
themselves Black Egyptians; the other, the East St. Louis Police

=== PAGE 122 ===
Department. The score was two to one—a total of three dead within a
month. After three tense days trying to bring these groups together to
hear each other and resolve their differences, I was driving home and
thinking how I never wanted to be in the middle of a conflict again for
the rest of my life.
The first thing I saw when I walked through the back door was my
children entangled in a fight. I had no energy to empathize with them so
I screamed nonviolently: “Hey, I’m in a lot of pain! Right now I really do
not want to deal with your fighting! I just
want some peace and quiet!” My older son, then nine, stopped short,
looked at me, and asked, “Do you want to talk about it?”
If we are able to speak our pain nakedly without blame, I find that
even people in distress are sometimes able to hear our need. Of course I
wouldn’t want to scream, “What’s the matter with you? Don’t you know
how to behave any better? I just got home after a rough day!” or
insinuate in any way that their behavior was at fault. I scream
nonviolently by calling attention to my own desperate needs and pain in
the moment.
If, however, the other party is also experiencing such intensity of
feelings that they can neither hear us nor leave us alone, and neither
emergency empathy nor nonviolent screaming has served us well, our
third recourse is to physically remove ourselves from the situation. We
give ourselves time out and the opportunity to acquire the empathy we
need to return in a different frame of mind.
Summary
Empathy is a respectful understanding of what others are experiencing.
We often have a strong urge to give advice or reassurance and to explain
our own position or feeling. Empathy, however, calls upon us to empty
our mind and listen to others with our whole being.
In NVC, no matter what words others may use to express themselves,
we simply listen for their observations, feelings, needs, and requests.
Then we may wish to reflect back, paraphrasing what we have
understood. We stay with empathy and allow others the opportunity to

=== PAGE 123 ===
fully express themselves before we turn our attention to solutions or
requests for relief.
We need empathy to give empathy. When we sense ourselves being
defensive or unable to empathize, we need to (1) stop, breathe, give
ourselves empathy; (2) scream nonviolently; or (3) take time out.
NVC in Action
A Wife Connects With Her Dying Husband
A patient had just been diagnosed with an advanced stage of lung cancer. The
following scene at his home, involving the patient, his wife, and a visiting nurse,
represents a last opportunity for him to connect emotionally with his wife and
discuss his dying before being admitted to the hospital. The wife began the
conversation with the nurse by complaining about the physical therapist who was
part of the home health care team assigned to her husband’s care.
Wife: She’s a bad therapist.
Nurse: (listening empathically to what the wife is feelingand wanting) Are you feeling
annoyed andwanting to see a different quality of care?
Wife: She doesn’t do anything. She made him stop walking when his pulse got
high.
Nurse: (continuing to hear the wife’s feelings and wants) Is it because you want your
husband to get better that you’re scared if the physical therapist
doesn’t push him, he won’t get stronger?
Wife: (starting to cry) Yes, I’m so scared!
Nurse: Are you scared of losing him?
Wife: Yes, we’ve been together so long.
Nurse: (listening for other feelings behind the fear) Are you worrying about how you
would feel if he dies?
Wife: I just can’t imagine how I am going to live without him. He’s always been
there for me. Always.
Nurse: So you’re sad when you think of living without him?
Wife: There is no one else besides him. He’s all I have, you know. My daughter
won’t even talk to me.

=== PAGE 124 ===
Nurse: It sounds like when you think of your daughter, you feel frustrated
because you wish you had a different relationship with her.
Wife: I wish I did, but she is such a selfish person. I don’t know why I even
bothered having kids. A lot of good it does me now!
Nurse: Sounds to me like you might be somewhat angry and disappointed because
you want more support from the family during your husband’s illness.
Wife: Yes, he’s so sick; I don’t know how I am going to get through this alone. I
haven’t anyone … not even to talk to, except with you here … now.
Even he won’t talk about it…. Look at him! (Husband remains silent and
impassive.) He doesn’t say anything!
Nurse: Are you sad, wishing the two of you could support each other and feel
more connected?
Wife: Yes. (She pauses, then makes a request.) Talk to him the way you talk to me.
Nurse: (wishing to clearly understand the need that is being addressed behind the wife’s
request) Are you wanting him to be listened to in a way that helps him
express what he’s feeling inside?
Wife: Yes, yes, that’s exactly it! I want him to feel comfortable talking and I want
to know what he is feeling. Using the nurse’s guess, the wife was able
to first become aware of what she wanted and then find the words to
articulate it. This was a key moment: often it is difficult for people to
identify what they want in a situation, even though they may know
what they don’t want. We see how a clear request—”Talk to him the
way you talk to me”—is a gift that empowers the other person. The
nurse was then able to act in a way she knew to be in harmony with
the wife’s wishes. This altered the atmosphere in the room, as the nurse
and the wife could now “work together,” both in a compassionate
mode.
Nurse: (turning to the husband) How do you feel when you hear what your wife
has shared?
Husband: I really love her.
Nurse: Are you glad to have an opportunity to talk about this with her?
Husband: Yes, we need to talk about it.
Nurse: Would you be willing to say how you are feeling about the cancer?

=== PAGE 125 ===
Husband: (after a brief silence) Not very good. The words good and bad are often
used to describe feelings when people have yet to identify the specific
emotion they are experiencing. Expressing his feelings more precisely
would help this patient with the emotional connection he was seeking
with his wife.
Nurse: (encouraging him to move toward more precision) you scared about dying?
Husband: No, not scared. (Notice the nurse’s incorrect guess does not hamper the
continued flow of dialogue.)
Nurse: (Because this patient isn’t able to verbalize his internal experience easily, the
nurse continues to support him in the process.) Do you feel angry about
dying?
Husband: No, not angry.
Nurse: (At this point, after two incorrect guesses, the nurse decides to express her own
feelings.) Well, now I’m puzzled about what you may be feeling, and
wonder if you can tell me.
Husband: I reckon, I’m thinking how she’ll do without me.
Nurse: Oh, are you worried she may not be able to handle her life without you?
Husband: Yes, worried she’ll miss me.
Nurse: (She is aware that dying patients often hang on due to worry over those they
are leaving behind, and sometimes need reassurance that loved ones can
accept their death before they can let themselves go.) Do you want to hear
how your wife feels when you say that?
Husband: Yes. Here the wife joined the conversation; in the continued presence of
the nurse, the couple began to express themselves openly to each other.
In this dialogue, the wife began with a complaint about the physical therapist.
However, after a series of exchanges during which she felt empathically received,
she was able to determine that what she really sought was a deeper connection
with her husband during this critical stage of their lives.
Exercise 5
RECEIVING EMPATHICALLY VERSUS NON-EMPATHICALLY
To see whether we are in agreement about the verbal expression of
empathy, please circle the number in front of each statement in which

=== PAGE 126 ===
person B is responding empathically to what is going on within Person
A.
1.Person A: How could I do something so stupid? Person B: Nobody is perfect; you’re too hard
on yourself.
2.Person A: If you ask me, we ought to ship all these immigrants back to where they came
from. Person B: Do you really think that would solve anything?
3.Person A: You aren’t God!
4.Person B: Are you feeling frustrated because you would like me to admit that there can be
other ways of interpreting this matter?
4.Person A: I think that you take me for granted. I wonder how you would manage without
me. Person B: That’s not true! I don’t take you for granted.
5.Person A: How could you say a thing like that to me? Person B: Are you feeling hurt because
I said that?
6.Person A: I’m furious with my husband. He’s never around when I need him. Person B: You
think he should be around more than he is?
7.Person A: I’m disgusted with how heavy I’m getting. Person B: Perhaps jogging would help.
8.Person A: I’ve been a nervous wreck planning for my daughter’s wedding. Her fiancé’s family
is not helping. About every day they change their minds about the kind of wedding
they would like.
Person B: So you’re feeling nervous about how to make arrangements and would appreciate it
if your future in-laws could be more aware of the complications their indecision
creates for you?
9. Person A: When my relatives come without letting me know ahead of time, I feel invaded. It
reminds me of how my parents used to disregard my needs and would plan things
for me. Person B: I know how you feel. I used to feel that way too.
10. Person A: I’m disappointed with your performance. I would have liked your department to
double your production last month. Person B: I understand that you are
disappointed, but we have had many absences due to illness.
Here are my responses for Exercise 5:
1. 1.I didn’t circle this one because I see Person B giving
reassurance to Person A rather than empathically receiving
what Person A is expressing.

=== PAGE 127 ===
2. 2.I see Person B attempting to educate Person A rather
than empathically receiving what Person A is expressing.
3. 3.If you circled this we are in agreement. I see Person B
empathically receiving what Person A is expressing.
4. 4.I didn’t circle this one because I see Person B disagreeing
and defending rather than empathically receiving what is
going on in Person A.
5. 5.I see Person B taking responsibility for Person A’s feelings
rather than empathically receiving what is going on in
Person A. An example of an empathic response might be:
“Are you feeling hurt because you would have liked me to
agree to do what you requested?”
6. 6.If you circled this we are in partial agreement. I see
Person B receiving Person A’s thoughts. However, I believe
we connect more deeply when we receive the feelings and
needs being expressed rather than the thoughts. Therefore,
I would have preferred it if Person B had said, “So you’re
feeling furious because you would like him to be around
more than he is?”
7. 7.I didn’t circle this one because I see Person B giving
advice rather than empathically receiving what is going on
in Person A.
8. 8.If you circled this we are in agreement. I see Person B
empathically receiving what is going on in Person A.
9. 9.I didn’t circle this one because I see Person B assuming
they understand and talking about their own feelings
rather than empathically receiving what is going on in
Person A.
10. 10. I didn’t circle this one because I see Person B starting
by focusing on Person A’s feelings but then shifting to
explaining.

=== PAGE 128 ===
CHAPTER EIGHT

=== PAGE 129 ===
C
The Power of Empathy
Empathy That Heals
arl Rogers described the impact of empathy on its recipients: “When
… someone really hears you without passing judgment on you,
without trying to take responsibility for you, without trying to mold you,
it feels damn good! … When I have been listened to and when I have
been heard, I am able to reperceive my world in a new way and to go
on. It is astonishing how elements that seem insoluble become soluble
when someone listens, how confusions that seem irremediable turn into
relatively clear flowing streams when one is heard.”
Empathy allows us “to reperceive [our] world in a new way and to go
on.”
One of my favorite stories about empathy comes from the principal of
an innovative school. She had returned after lunch one day to find Milly,
an elementary school student, sitting dejectedly in her office waiting to
see her. She sat down next to Milly, who began, “Mrs. Anderson, have
you ever had a week when everything you did hurt somebody else, and
you never intended to hurt anyone at all?”
“Don’t just do something… .”
“Yes,” the principal replied, “I think I understand,” whereupon Milly
proceeded to describe her week. “By now,” the principal related, “I was
quite late for a very important meeting—still had my coat on—and
anxious not to keep a room full of people waiting, and so I asked, ‘Milly,
what can I do for you?’ Milly reached over, took both my shoulders in
her hands, looked me straight in the
eyes, and said very firmly, ‘Mrs. Anderson, I don’t want you to do
anything; I just want you to listen.’
“This was one of the most significant moments of learning in my life—
taught to me by a child—so I thought, ‘Never mind the roomful of adults
waiting for me!’ Milly and I moved over to a bench that afforded us
more privacy and sat, my arm around her shoulders, her head on my

=== PAGE 130 ===
chest, and her arm around my waist, while she talked until she was
done. And you know, it didn’t take that long.”
One of the most satisfying aspects of my work is to hear how
individuals have used NVC to strengthen their ability to connect
empathically with others. My friend Laurence, who lives in Switzerland,
described how upset she felt when her six-year-old son had stormed
away angrily while she was still talking to him. Isabelle, her ten-year-old
daughter, who had accompanied her to a recent NVC workshop,
remarked, “So you’re really angry, Mom. You’d like for him to talk when
he’s angry and not run off.” Laurence marveled at how, upon hearing
Isabelle’s words, she felt an immediate diminishing of tension, and was
subsequently able to be more understanding with her son when he
returned.
A college instructor described how relationships between students and
faculty had been affected when several members of the faculty learned
to listen empathically and to express themselves more vulnerably and
honestly. “The students opened up more and more and told us about the
various personal problems that were interfering with their studies. The
more they talked about it, the more work they were able to complete.
Even though this kind of listening took a lot of our time, we were glad to
spend it in this way. Unfortunately, the dean got upset; he said we were
not counselors and should spend more time teaching and less time
talking with the students.”
When I asked how the faculty had dealt with this, the instructor
replied, “We empathized with the dean’s concern. We heard that he felt
worried and wanted to know that we weren’t getting involved in things
we couldn’t handle. We also heard that he needed reassurance
that the time spent on talking wasn’t cutting into our teaching
responsibilities. He seemed relieved by the way we listened to him. We
continued to talk with the students because we could see that the more
we listened to them, the better they did in their studies.”
It’s harder to empathize with those who appear to possess more
power, status, or resources.
When we work in a hierarchically structured institution, there is a

=== PAGE 131 ===
tendency to hear commands and judgments from those higher up in the
hierarchy. While we may easily empathize with our peers and with those
in less powerful positions, we may find ourselves being defensive or
apologetic, instead of empathic, in the presence of those we identify as
our “superiors.” This is why I was particularly pleased that these faculty
members had remembered to empathize with their dean as well as with
their students.
Empathy and the Ability to Be Vulnerable
Because we are called to reveal our deepest feelings and needs, we may
sometimes find it challenging to express ourselves in NVC.
Self-expression becomes easier, however, after we empathize with
others, because we will then have touched their humanness and realized
the common qualities we share. The more we connect with the feelings
and needs behind their words, the less frightening it is to open up to
other people.
The situations where we are the most reluctant to express
vulnerability are often those where we want to maintain a “tough
image” for fear of losing authority or control.
The more we empathize with the other party, the safer we feel.
Once I showed my vulnerability to some members of a street gang in
Cleveland by acknowledging the hurt I was feeling and my desire to be
treated with more respect. “Oh, look,” one of them remarked, “he’s
feeling hurt; isn’t that too bad!” at which point all his friends chimed in
laughing. Here again, I could interpret them as taking advantage of my
vulnerability (Option 2: Blame others), or I could empathize with the
feelings and needs behind their behavior (Option 4: Sense others’
feelings and needs).
If, however, I have an image that I’m being humiliated and taken
advantage of, I may feel too wounded, angry, or scared to be able to
empathize. At such a moment, I would need to withdraw physically in
order to offer myself some empathy or to request it from a reliable
source. After discovering the needs that had been so powerfully
triggered in me and receiving adequate empathy for them, I would then

=== PAGE 132 ===
be ready to return and empathize with the other party. In situations of
pain, I recommend first getting the empathy necessary to go beyond the
thoughts occupying our heads and recognize our deeper needs.
As I listened closely to the gang member’s remark, “Oh look, he’s
feeling hurt; isn’t that too bad?” and the laughter that followed, I sensed
that he and his friends were annoyed and not wanting to be subjected to
guilt trips and manipulation. They may have been reacting to people in
their pasts who used phrases like that hurts me to imply disapproval.
Since I didn’t verify it with them out loud, I have no way of knowing if
my guess was in fact accurate. Just focusing my attention there,
however, kept me from either taking it personally or getting angry.
Instead of judging them for ridiculing me or treating me disrespectfully,
I concentrated on hearing the pain and the needs behind such behavior.
“Hey,” one of them burst out, “this is a bunch of crap you’re offering
us! Suppose there are members of another gang here and they have guns
and you don’t. And you say just stand there and talk to them? Crap!”
Then everybody was laughing again, and again I directed my attention
to their feelings and needs: “So it sounds like you’re really fed up with
learning something that has no relevance in those situations?”
“Yeah, and if you lived in this neighborhood, you’d know this is a
bunch of crap.”
“So you need to trust that someone teaching you something has some
knowledge of your neighborhood?”
“Damn right. Some of these dudes would blast you away before you
got two words out of your mouth!”
“And you need to trust that someone trying to teach you something
understands the dangers around here?” I continued to listen in this
manner, sometimes verbalizing what I heard and sometimes not. This
continued for forty-five minutes, and then I sensed a shift: they felt that I
was truly understanding them. A counselor in the program noticed the
shift, and asked them out loud, “What do you think of this man?” The
gentleman who had been giving me the roughest time replied, “He’s the
best speaker we’ve ever had.”
We “say a lot” by listening for other people’s feelings and needs.

=== PAGE 133 ===
Astonished, the counselor turned to me and whispered, “But you
haven’t said anything!” In fact, I had said a lot by demonstrating that
there was nothing they could throw at me that couldn’t be translated
into universal human feelings and needs.
Using Empathy to Defuse Danger
The ability to offer empathy to people in stressful situations can defuse
potential violence. A teacher in the inner city of St. Louis related an
incident where she had conscientiously stayed after school to help a
student, even though teachers were warned, for their own safety, to
leave the building after classes were dismissed. A stranger entered her
classroom, where the following exchange took place:
Young man: Take off your clothes.
Teacher: (noticing that the young man was shaking) I’m sensing this is very scary for you.
Young man: Did you hear me? God damn it, take off your clothes!
Teacher: I’m sensing you’re really pissed off right now and you want me to do what you’re
telling me.
Young man: You’re damned right, and you’re going to get hurt if you don’t.
Teacher: I’d like you to tell me if there’s some other way of meeting your needs that wouldn’t
hurt me.
Young man: I said take them off.
Teacher: I can hear how much you want this. At the same time, I want you to know how scared
and horrible I feel, and how grateful I’d be if you’d leave without hurting me.
Young man: Give me your purse.
The teacher handed the stranger her purse, relieved not to be raped.
She later described how, each time she empathized with the young man,
she could sense him becoming less adamant in his intention to follow
through with the rape.
A metropolitan police officer attending a follow-up training in NVC
once greeted me with this account:
I’m sure glad you had us practicing empathy with angry people that last time.
Just a few days after our session, I went to arrest someone in a public housing

=== PAGE 134 ===
project. When I brought him out, my car was surrounded by about sixty people
screaming things at me like, ‘Let him go! He didn’t do anything! You police are a
bunch of racist pigs!’ Although I was skeptical that empathy would help, I didn’t
have many other options. So I reflected back the feelings that were coming at me; I
said things like, ‘So you don’t trust my reasons for arresting this man? You think it
has to do with race?’ After several minutes of my continuing to reflect their
feelings, the group became less hostile. In the end they opened a path so I could get
to my car.
Finally, I’d like to illustrate how a young woman used empathy to
bypass violence during her night shift at a drug detoxification center in
Toronto. The young woman recounted this story during the second NVC
workshop she attended. At eleven o’clock one night, a few weeks after
her first NVC training, a man who’d obviously been taking drugs walked
in off the street and demanded a room. The young woman started to
explain to him that all the
rooms had been filled for the night. She was about to hand the man
the address of another detox center when he hurled her to the ground.
“The next thing I knew, he was sitting across my chest holding a knife to
my throat and shouting, ‘You bitch, don’t lie to me! You do too have a
room!’”
She then proceeded to apply her training by listening for his feelings
and needs.
“You remembered to do that under those conditions?” I asked,
impressed.
“What choice did I have? Desperation sometimes makes good
communicators of us all! You know, Marshall,” she added, “that joke you
told in the workshop really helped me. In fact, I think it saved my life.”
“What joke?”
Rather than put your “but” in the face of an angry person, empathize.
“Remember when you said never to put your ‘but’ in the face of an
angry person? I was all ready to start arguing with him; I was about to
say, ‘But I don’t have a room!’ when I remembered your joke. It had
really stayed with me because only the week before, I was arguing with
my mother and she’d said to me, ‘I could kill you when you answer

=== PAGE 135 ===
“but” to everything I say!’ Imagine, if my own mother was angry enough
to kill me for using that word, what would this man have done? If I’d
said, ‘But I don’t have a room!’ when he was screaming at me, I have no
doubt he would have slit my throat.
“So instead, I took a deep breath and said, ‘It sounds like you’re really
angry and you want to be given a room.’ He yelled back, ‘I may be an
addict, but by God, I deserve respect. I’m tired of nobody giving me
respect. My parents don’t give me respect. I’m gonna get respect!’ I just
focused on his feelings and needs and said, ‘Are you fed up, not getting
the respect that you want?’”
“How long did this go on?” I asked.
“Oh, about another thirty-five minutes,” she replied.
“That must have been terrifying.”
“No, not after the first couple of interchanges, because then something
else we’d learned here became apparent. When I concentrated on
listening for his feelings and needs, I stopped seeing him as a monster. I
could see, just as you’d said, how people who seem like monsters are
simply human beings whose language and behavior sometimes keep us
from seeing their humanness. The more I was able to focus my attention
on his feelings and needs, the more I saw him as a person full of despair
whose needs weren’t being met. I became confident that if I held my
attention there, I wouldn’t be hurt. After he’d received the empathy he
needed, he got off me, put the knife away, and I helped him find a room
at another center.”
When we listen for feelings and needs, we no longer see people as
monsters.
Delighted that she’d learned to respond empathically in such an
extreme situation, I asked curiously, “What are you doing back here? It
sounds like you’ve mastered NVC and should be out teaching others
what you’ve learned.”
“Now I need you to help me with a hard one,” she said. “I’m almost
afraid to ask. What could be harder than that?” “Now I need you to help
me with my mother. Despite all the insight I got into that ‘but’
phenomenon, you know what

=== PAGE 136 ===
It may be difficult to empathize with those who are closest to us.
happened? At supper the next evening when I told my mother what had
happened, she said, ‘You’re going to cause your father and me to have a
heart attack if you keep that job. You simply have to find different
work!’ So guess what I said to her? ‘But, mother, it’s my life!’”
I couldn’t have asked for a more compelling example of how difficult
it can be to respond empathically to one’s own family members!
Empathy in Hearing Someone’s “No!”
Because of our tendency to read rejection into someone else’s “no” and
“I don’t want to …,” these are important messages for
Empathizing with someone’s “no” protects us from taking it
personally. us to be able to empathize with. If we take them personally,
we may feel hurt without understanding what’s actually going on within
the other person. When we shine the light of consciousness on the
feelings and needs behind someone else’s “no,” however, we become
cognizant of what they are wanting that prevents them from responding
as we would like.
One time I asked a woman during a workshop break to join me and
other participants for some ice cream nearby. “No!” she replied
brusquely. The tone of her voice led me to interpret her answer as a
rejection, until I reminded myself to tune in to the feelings and needs she
might be expressing through her “no.” “I sense that you are angry,” I
said. “Is that so?”
“No,” she replied, “it’s just that I don’t want to be corrected every time
I open my mouth.”
Now I sensed that she was fearful rather than angry. I checked this out
by asking, “So you’re feeling fearful and want to protect yourself from
being in a situation where you might be judged for how you
communicate?”
“Yes,” she affirmed, “I can imagine sitting in the ice cream shop with
you and having you notice everything I say.”
I then discovered that the way I’d been providing feedback in the
workshop had been frightening to her. My empathy for her message had

=== PAGE 137 ===
taken the sting out of her “no” for me: I heard her desire to avoid
receiving similar feedback in public. Assuring her that I wouldn’t
evaluate her communication in public, I then conferred with her on ways
to give feedback that would leave her feeling safe. And yes, she joined
the group for ice cream.
Empathy to Revive a Lifeless Conversation
We have all found ourselves in the midst of a lifeless conversation.
Perhaps we’re at a social event, hearing words without feeling any
connection to the speaker. Or we’re listening to someone my friend Kelly
Bryson would call a “Babble-on-ian”—someone who elicits in their
listeners the fear of interminable conversation. Vitality drains out of
conversations when we lose connection with the feelings and needs
generating the speaker’s words, and with the requests associated with
those needs. This effect is common when people talk without
consciousness of what they are feeling, needing, or requesting. Instead of
being engaged in an exchange of life energy with other human beings,
we see ourselves becoming wastebaskets for their words.
How and when do we interrupt a dead conversation to bring it back to
life? I’d suggest the best time to interrupt is when we’ve heard one word
more than we want to hear. The longer we wait, the harder it is to be
civil when we do step in. Our intention in interrupting is not to claim
the floor for ourselves, but to help the speaker connect to the life energy
behind the words being spoken. We do this by tuning in to possible
feelings and needs. Thus, if an aunt is repeating the story about how
twenty years ago her husband deserted her and her two small children,
we might interrupt by saying, “So, Auntie, it sounds like you are still
feeling hurt, wishing you’d been treated more fairly.” People are not
aware that empathy is often what they are needing. Neither do they
realize that they are more likely to receive that empathy by expressing
the feelings and needs that are alive in them than by recounting tales of
past injustice and hardship.
To bring a conversation back to life: interrupt with empathy.
Another way to bring a conversation to life is to openly express our

=== PAGE 138 ===
desire to be more connected, and to request information that would help
us establish that connection. Once, at a cocktail party, I was in the midst
of an abundant flow of words that to me seemed lifeless. “Excuse me,” I
broke in, addressing the group of nine other people I’d found myself
with, “I’m feeling impatient because I’d like to be more connected with
you, but our conversation isn’t creating the kind of connection I’m
wanting. I’d like to know if the conversation we’ve been having is
meeting your needs, and if so, what needs of yours are being met
through it.”
All nine people stared at me as if I had thrown a rat in the punch
bowl. Fortunately, I remembered to tune in to the feelings and needs
being expressed through their silence. “Are you annoyed with my
interrupting 
because 
you 
would 
have 
liked 
to 
continue 
the
conversation?” I asked.
What bores the listener bores the speaker too.
After another silence, one of the men replied, “No, I’m not annoyed. I
was thinking about what you were asking. And no, I wasn’t enjoying the
conversation; in fact, I was totally bored with it.”
At the time, I was surprised to hear his response because he had been
the one doing most of the talking! Now I am no longer surprised: I have
since discovered that conversations that are lifeless for the listener are
equally so for the speaker.
Speakers prefer that listeners interrupt rather than pretend to listen.
You may wonder how we can muster the courage to flatly interrupt
someone in the middle of a sentence. I once conducted an informal
survey, posing the following question: “If you are using more words than
somebody wants to hear, do you want that person to pretend to listen or
to stop you?” Of the scores of people I approached, all but one expressed
a preference to be stopped. Their answers gave me courage by
convincing me that it is more considerate to interrupt people than to
pretend to listen. All of us want our words to enrich others, not to
burden them.

=== PAGE 139 ===
Empathy for Silence
One of the hardest messages for many of us to empathize with is silence.
This is especially true when we’ve expressed ourselves vulnerably and
need to know how others are reacting to our words. At such times, it’s
easy to project our worst fears onto the lack of response and forget to
connect with the feelings and needs being expressed through the silence.
One time when I was working with the staff of a business
organization, I was talking about something deeply emotional and began
to cry. When I looked up, I received a response from the organization’s
director that was not easy
Empathize with silence by listening for the feelings and needs behind
it. for me to receive: silence. He turned his face from me with what I
interpreted to be an expression of disgust. Fortunately,
I remembered to put my attention on what might be going on within
him, and said, “I’m sensing from your response to my crying that you’re
feeling disgusted, and you’d prefer to have someone more in control of
his feelings consulting with your staff.”
If he had answered yes, I would have been able to accept that we had
different values around expressing emotions, without somehow thinking
that I was wrong for having expressed my emotions as I did. But instead
of “yes,” the director replied, “No, not at all. I was just thinking of how
my wife wishes I could cry.” He went on to reveal that his wife, who was
divorcing him, had been complaining that living with him was like living
with a rock.
During my practice as a psychotherapist, I was contacted by the
parents of a twenty-year-old woman under psychiatric care. She had
been undergoing medication, hospitalization, and shock treatments for
several months, and had become mute three months before her parents
contacted me. When they brought her to my office, she had to be
assisted because, left to herself, she didn’t move.
In my office, she crouched in her chair, shaking, her eyes on the floor.
Trying to connect empathically with the feelings and needs being
expressed through her nonverbal message, I said, “I’m sensing that you
are frightened and would like to be sure that it’s safe to talk. Is that

=== PAGE 140 ===
accurate?”
She showed no reaction, so I expressed my own feeling by saying, “I’m
very concerned about you, and I’d like you to tell me if there’s
something I could say or do to make you feel safer.” Still no response.
For the next forty minutes, I continued to either reflect her feelings and
needs or express my own. There was no visible response, nor even the
slightest recognition that I was trying to communicate with her. Finally I
expressed that I was tired, and that I wanted her to return the following
day.
The next few days were like the first. I continued focusing my
attention on her feelings and needs, sometimes verbally reflecting what I
understood and sometimes doing so silently. From time to time I would
express what was going on in myself. She sat shaking in her chair, saying
nothing.
On the fourth day, when she still didn’t respond, I reached over and
held her hand. Not knowing whether my words were communicating my
concern, I hoped the physical contact might do so more effectively. At
first contact, her muscles tensed and she shrank further back into her
chair. I was about to release her hand when I sensed a slight yielding, so
I kept my hold; after a few moments I noticed a progressive relaxation
on her part. I held her hand for several minutes while I talked to her as I
had the first few days. Still she said nothing.
When she arrived the next day, she appeared even more tense than
before, but there was one difference: she extended a clenched fist toward
me while turning her face away from me. I was at first confused by the
gesture, but then sensed she had something in her hand she wanted me
to have. Taking her fist in my hand, I pried open her fingers. In her palm
was a crumpled note with the following message: “Please help me say
what’s inside.”
I was elated to receive this sign of her desire to communicate. After
another hour of encouragement, she finally expressed a first sentence,
slowly and fearfully. When I reflected back what I had heard her saying,
she appeared relieved and then continued, slowly and fearfully, to talk.
A year later, she sent me a copy of the following entries from her
journal:

=== PAGE 141 ===
I
came out of the hospital, away from shock treatments and strong medicine. That
was about April. The three months before that are completely
blank in my mind, as well as the three and a half years before April.
They say that, after getting out of the hospital, I went through a time at home of
not eating, not talking, and wanting to stay in bed all the time. Then I was referred
to Dr. Rosenberg for counseling. I don’t remember much of those next two or three
months other than being in Dr. Rosenberg’s office and talking with him.
I’d begun ‘waking up’ since that first session with him. I’d begun sharing with
him things that bothered me—things that I would never have dreamed of telling
anyone about. And I remember how much that meant to me. It was so hard to talk.
But Dr. Rosenberg cared about me and showed it, and I wanted to talk with him. I
was always glad afterwards that I had let something out. I remember counting the
days, even the hours, until my next appointment with him.
I’ve also learned that facing reality is not all bad. I am realizing more and more
of the things that I need to stand up to, things that I need to get out and do on my
own.
This is scary. And it’s very hard. And it’s so discouraging that when I am trying
really a lot, I can still fail so terribly. But the good part of reality is that I’ve been
seeing that it includes wonderful things, too.
I’ve learned in the past year about how wonderful it can be to share myself with
other people. I think it was mostly just one part that I learned, about the thrill of
my talking to other people and having them actually listen—even really understand
at times.
I continue to be amazed by the healing power of empathy. Time and
again I have witnessed people transcend the paralyzing effects of
psychological pain when they have sufficient contact with
Empathy lies in our ability to be present. someone who can hear them
empathically.
As listeners, we don’t need insights into psychological dynamics or
training in psychotherapy. What is essential is our ability to be present
to what’s really going on within—to the unique feelings and needs a
person is experiencing in that very moment.

=== PAGE 142 ===
Summary
Our ability to offer empathy can allow us to stay vulnerable, defuse
potential violence, hear the word no without taking it as a rejection,
revive a lifeless conversation, and even hear the feelings and needs
expressed through silence. Time and again, people transcend the
paralyzing effects of psychological pain when they have sufficient
contact with someone who can hear them empathically.

